7 
Depressive Disorders
THE CLINICAL PRESENTATION
A depressed mood and a loss of interest or pleasure are the key symptoms of
depression. Patients may say that they feel blue, hopeless, in the dumps, or
worthless. For a patient, the depressed mood often has a distinct quality that
differentiates it from the normal emotion of sadness or grief. Patients often
describe the symptom of depression as one of agonizing emotional pain.
Alternately they perceive it as a physical illness in which they feel exhausted
and unmotivated. Others report feeling little, being unable to cry, and finding
it difficult to experience any pleasure.
The classic presentation of a depressed patient is a person with a stooped
posture, decreased movement, and a downward averted gaze. In practice,
there is a considerable range of behaviors ranging from persons with no
observable symptoms to the catatonically depressed patient. Among
observable signs of depression, generalized psychomotor retardation is the
most often described, in which patients show little spontaneous movement.
At times it may be so severe as to be challenging to differentiate from
catatonia.
Ms. A, a 34-year-old literature professor, presented to a mood clinic with
the following complaint: “I am in a daze, confused, disoriented, staring.
My thoughts do not flow, my mind is arrested.… I seem to lack any sense
of direction, purpose.… I have such an inertia, I cannot assert myself. I
cannot fight; I have no will.”
Psychomotor agitation may occur, including such behaviors as hand
wringing and hair pulling. Many depressed patients have a decreased rate and
volume of speech; they respond to questions with single words and exhibit
delayed responses to questions.
When present, observable symptoms are helpful in the diagnosis; however,
the lack of such symptoms does not imply that a patient has no disorder. It is
not abnormal, for example, to encounter patients who can maintain a measure
of social appropriateness, even smiling and laughing when with others,
despite feeling internally miserable.
The most typical somatic symptoms of depression are called the
neurovegetative symptoms of depression and typically include a variety of
physical symptoms. Table 7-1 lists typical neurovegetative symptoms.
Almost all depressed patients (97 percent) complain about reduced energy;
they have difficulty finishing tasks, are impaired at school and work, and
have less motivation to undertake new projects. About 80 percent of patients
complain of trouble sleeping, especially early morning awakening (i.e.,
terminal insomnia) and multiple awakenings at night, during which they
ruminate about their problems. Many patients have decreased appetite and
weight loss, but others experience increased appetite and weight gain and
sleep longer than usual. These are sometimes called reversed neurovegetative
symptoms or atypical features.
Depression is, by definition, a mood disorder, and disturbances of mood
are at the core. Patients feel “bad” and may use words such as “sad,”
“depressed,” “blue,” “down,” or similar words to describe this feeling. Here
we use the term dysphoria to encompass these various depressive feelings as
a way to avoid the confusion inherent in using the word “depressed” to mean
both the diagnosis and the core symptom. Also, many patients are reluctant to
use the word “depressed” as they may have difficulty coming to terms with
their diagnosis. In such cases, other synonyms, including those above, may
seem less threatening to the patient.
Some patients deny dysphoria altogether, but instead, describe feeling
unable to enjoy things that are usually enjoyable to them. We call this
anhedonia or a lack of pleasure. In addition to dysphoria and anhedonia,
many depressed patients also report feeling anxious.
The critical point is that although sadness and even depression may be, in
themselves, normal reactions, when encountered in the context of a
depressive disorder, patients do not experience them as normal. Patients will
often feel genuinely ill and be able to distinguish their emotional state from
“normal” feelings of sadness. Many will first interpret this as indicative of
medical illness and present to their primary care doctor complaining of
feeling “sick” rather than depressed.
Depressed patients customarily have negative views of the world and
themselves. Their thought content often includes nondelusional ruminations
about loss, guilt, suicide, and death. About 10 percent of all depressed
patients have marked symptoms of a thought disorder, usually thought
blocking and profound poverty of content.
A 42-year-old civil servant said that she was so paralyzed by depression
that she felt that she had no personal initiative and volition left; she
believed that some malignant force had taken over her actions and that it
was commenting on every action that she was undertaking. The patient
recovered fully with thymoleptic medication. There is no reason to
believe that, in this patient, the feelings of somatic passability and
running commentary indicated a schizophrenic process.
Depressed patients may complain of either delusions or hallucinations
associated with their depressive episode: such patients may have a major
depressive episode with psychotic features, often called psychotic depression.
Delusions and hallucinations that are consistent with a depressed mood are
said to be mood-congruent. Mood-congruent delusions in a depressed person
include those of guilt, sinfulness, worthlessness, poverty, failure, persecution,
and terminal somatic illnesses (such as cancer and a “rotting” brain). The
content of mood-incongruent delusions or hallucinations is not consistent
with a depressed mood. For example, a mood-incongruent delusion in a
depressed person might involve grandiose themes of exaggerated power,
knowledge, and worth.
Table 7-1
Neurovegetative Symptoms of Depression
Common:
Fatigue, low energy
Inattention
Insomnia, early morning awakening
Poor appetite, associated weight loss
Sometimes included:
Decreased libido and sexual performance
Menstrual irregularities
Worse depression in the AM
About two-thirds of all depressed patients contemplate suicide, and 10 to
15 percent commit suicide. Those recently hospitalized with a suicide attempt
or suicidal ideation have a higher lifetime risk of successful suicide than
those never hospitalized for suicidal ideation.
Depressed patients with psychotic features occasionally consider killing a
person as a result of their delusional systems, but the most severely depressed
patients often lack the motivation or the energy to act impulsively or
violently. Patients with depressive disorders are at increased risk of suicide as
they begin to improve and regain the energy needed to plan and carry out
suicide (paradoxical suicide).
About 50 to 75 percent of all depressed patients have some measure of
cognitive impairment. Cognitive symptoms include subjective reports of an
inability to concentrate (84 percent of patients in one study) and impairments
in thinking (67 percent of patients in another study).
Most depressed patients are oriented, although some may not have
sufficient energy or interest to answer questions about these subjects during
an interview. Memory can be challenging to disentangle from concentration
difficulties. However, some patients appear to have genuine memory
difficulties in addition to other cognitive deficits.
Some depressed patients sometimes seem unaware of their depression and
do not complain of a mood disturbance even though they exhibit withdrawal
from family, friends, and activities that previously interested them. Other
depressed patients, particularly those with disordered thoughts, may be overly
negative, hyperbolic in their symptomatic description, and hopeless about
their future. It may be difficult to convince such patients that improvement is
possible.
We can assess judgment by reviewing patients’ actions in the recent past
and their behavior during the interview. Patients with particularly negative
outlooks should be cautioned not to make important life decisions (e.g.,
around a relationship or job) until they are “thinking normally” again.
In interviews and conversations, depressed patients may emphasize the bad
and minimize the good. They may be pessimistic about past treatment trials.
A common clinical mistake is to unquestioningly believe a depressed patient
who states that a previous trial of antidepressant medications did not work.
Such statements may be false, and they require a confirmation from another
source. Psychiatrists should not view patients’ misinformation as an
intentional fabrication; the admission of any hopeful information may be
impossible for a person in a depressed state of mind.
Other patients, particularly those with poor insight, may have difficulty
reporting symptoms or past episodes. Asking about changes in functioning
rather than emotional states may be helpful (“have there been times that you
felt unable to work, or care for your children?”).
Presentation in Special Populations
Depression in Children and Adolescents. School phobia and
excessive clinging to parents may be symptoms of depression in children.
Poor academic performance, substance abuse, antisocial behavior, sexual
promiscuity, truancy, and running away may be symptoms of depression in
adolescents.
Depression in Older People. Depression is more common in older
persons than it is in the general population. Various studies have reported
prevalence rates ranging from 25 to almost 50 percent, although the
percentage of these cases that are caused by major depressive disorder is
uncertain. Several studies indicate that depression in older persons correlates
with low socioeconomic status, the loss of a spouse, a concurrent physical
illness, and social isolation. Other studies have indicated that depression in
older persons is underdiagnosed and undertreated, perhaps particularly by
general practitioners. The underrecognition of depression in older persons
may occur because the disorder appears more often with somatic complaints
in older than in younger, age groups. Further, ageism may influence and
cause clinicians to accept depressive symptoms as usual in older patients.
DIAGNOSIS
Depressive disorders can take many forms, depending on their severity and
chronicity. The disorder that we most associate with “classic” depression is
major depressive disorder, and this is the disorder most often referred to
when someone reports that they suffer from depression. However, it is
essential to understand the different varieties of depressive disorders,
including those not included in some formal classifications, as all are
significant sources of morbidity.
Major Depressive Disorder
The primary feature of major depressive disorder is the occurrence of at least
one episode of major depression, which is significant depressive symptoms
that last for a significant time. Table 7-2 compares the different approaches to
diagnosing major depressive disorder.
With Psychotic Features. The presence of psychotic features in major
depressive disorder reflects severe disease and is a poor prognostic indicator.
We often categorize psychotic symptoms as either mood-congruent, that is, in
harmony with the mood disorder (“I deserve punishment because I am so
bad”), or mood-incongruent, not in harmony with the mood disorder. Patients
with mood-incongruent psychotic symptoms may be more likely to have a
comorbid primary psychotic disorder, such as schizoaffective disorder or
schizophrenia.
With Melancholic Features. Melancholia is one of the oldest terms used
in psychiatry, dating back to Hippocrates in the 4th century to describe the
dark mood of depression. We still use it to refer to a depression characterized
by severe anhedonia, early morning awakening, weight loss, and profound
feelings of guilt (often over trivial events). It is not uncommon for patients
who are melancholic to have suicidal ideation. Melancholia is associated with
changes in the autonomic nervous system and endocrine functions. For that
reason, we sometimes refer to melancholia as “endogenous depression” or
depression that arises in the absence of external life stressors or precipitants.
Table 7-2
Major Depressive Disorder
 
DSM-5
ICD-10
Diagnostic name
Major Depressive
Disorder
Major Depressive
Episode
Duration
2 wk
 
Symptoms
•  Dysphoria or feeling
depressed
•  Anhedonia
•  ↑ or ↓ weight or
appetite
•  ↑ or ↓ sleep
•  ↑ or ↓ activity
•  ↓ energy
•  Depressing thoughts:
worthlessness, guilt
•  ↓ concentration
•  Suicidal ideation/plan
•  ↓ mood
•  ↓ energy
•  ↓ activity
•  ↓ capacity for
enjoyment
•  ↓ interest
•  ↓ concentration
•  Fatigue after even
minimal effort
•  Disturbed sleep/early
morning awakening
•  Disturbed appetite/ ↓
weight
•  ↓ self esteem
•  ↓ self-confidence
•  Guilt or worthlessness
•  Mood unreactive to
circumstances
•  Anhedonia
•  Worse symptoms in
the AM
•  Psychomotor
disturbance: agitation
or retardation
•  ↓ libido
Required number
of symptoms
5 (1 has to be one of
the first two listed)
 
Psychosocial
consequences
of symptoms
Distress or impaired
functioning (social,
occupational, or
other significant
areas)
Depends on severity
Exclusions (Not
better
explained by):
Medical illness
Substance
Other psychiatric
disorder
History of mania or
hypomania
Adjustment disorder
Conduct disorder
Recurrent depressive
disorder (which is
considered a
separate diagnosis)
Symptom
specifiers
With anxious distress
•  2+ symptoms of
anxiety
With mixed features
•  3+ manic/hypomanic
symptoms during the
depressive episode
(if occur
independently,
diagnose bipolar
disorder)
With melancholic
features
•  Loss of pleasure or
reactivity to pleasure
•  3+ of the following
•  Severe
depression/despair
•  Mood worse in AM
Depressive reaction
Psychogenic depression
Reactive depression
•  Early morning
awakening
•  Psychomotor
disturbance
•  Anorexia/weight
loss
•  Guilt
With atypical features
•  Mood reactivity
•  2+ of following
•  Increased
appetite/weight
•  Hyposomnia
•  Leaden paralysis
•  Rejection sensitivity
With mood-congruent
psychotic features
With mood-
incongruent
psychotic features
With catatonia
•  Must be present
during most of
depressive episode
With peripartum onset
With seasonal pattern
•  Usually occurs during
a specific season
Course specifiers With psychotic
features
•  Psychotic symptoms
occurring only during
the depressive
Recurrent Depressive
Disorder (Coded as
separate disorder):
Repeated episodes of
the above symptoms.
episode
•  Mood-congruent
•  Mood-incongruent
In partial remission
•  Full criteria no
longer met
In full remission
•  0 symptoms for 2
mo
No mania.
Severity
specifiers
Mild: minimal
symptoms
Moderate: between
mild and severe
Severe: # of symptoms
and
severity/dysfunction
well beyond that
required for
diagnosis
Mild
•  2–3 symptoms
•  Functions normal
despite distress
Moderate
•  4+ symptoms
•  Difficulty with
functioning
Severe
•  Several symptoms
marked and
distressing
•  Loss of self-
esteem/feels
worthless and guilty
•  Suicidal ideation/acts
•  Somatic symptoms of
depression
Severe with psychotic
symptoms
•  As above but with
psychosis
Other
•  Atypical depression
•  Single episodes of
“masked depression”
Unspecified
With Atypical Features. Patients with major depressive disorder with
atypical features have specific, predictable characteristics. As described
above, these tend to be the reverse of the neurovegetative symptoms. They
may, for example, overeat or oversleep. Patients with atypical features have a
younger age of onset and more severe psychomotor slowing. They also are
more likely to have comorbid disorders, including anxiety disorders,
substance use disorder, or somatic symptom disorder. They are easy to
misdiagnose as having an anxiety disorder rather than a mood disorder.
Patients with atypical features may also have a long-term course, a diagnosis
of bipolar I disorder, or a seasonal pattern to their disorder.
Kevin, a 15-year-old adolescent, was referred to a sleep center to rule out
narcolepsy. His main complaints were fatigue, boredom, and a need to
sleep all the time. Although he had always started the day somewhat
slowly, he now could not get out of bed to go to school. That alarmed his
mother, prompting sleep consultation. Formerly a B student, he had been
failing most of his courses in the 6 months before referral. Psychological
counseling, predicated on the premise that his family’s recent move from
another city had led to Kevin’s isolation, had not been beneficial.
Extensive neurologic and general medical workup findings had also
proven negative. He slept 12 to 15 hours per day but denied cataplexy,
sleep paralysis, and hypnagogic hallucinations. During psychiatric
interview, he denied being depressed but admitted that he had lost interest
in everything except his dog. He had no drive, participated in no
activities, and had gained 30 lb in 6 months. He believed that he was
“brain damaged” and wondered whether it was worth living like that. The
question of suicide disturbed him because it was contrary to his religious
beliefs. These findings led to the prescription of an antidepressant. Not
only did the antidepressant reverse the presenting complaints, but it also
pushed him to the brink of a manic episode. (Courtesy of HS Akiskal,
M.D.)
With Catatonic Features. As a symptom, catatonia can be present in
several mental disorders, most commonly, schizophrenia and mood disorders.
The hallmark symptoms of catatonia are stupor, blunted affect, extreme
withdrawal, negativism, and marked psychomotor retardation. The presence
of catatonic features in patients with mood disorders may have prognostic
and treatment significance.
Postpartum Onset. We diagnose the postpartum subtype if the onset of
symptoms is within 4 weeks postpartum. Postpartum mental disorders
commonly include psychotic symptoms.
Seasonal Pattern. Patients with a seasonal pattern to their mood disorders
tend to experience depressive episodes during a particular season, most
commonly winter. The pattern has become known as seasonal affective
disorder (SAD), although DSM-5 does not use this term. There is some
controversy regarding whether this represents a subtype of major depressive
disorder or a distinct entity. Either way, the presence of the disorder has
implications for treatment, as patients with a seasonal pattern to their
depression may preferentially respond to light therapy.
Dysthymic Disorder
Dysthymic disorder (also called dysthymia) is the presence of depressive
symptoms that are less severe than those of major depressive disorder.
Although less severe than a major depressive disorder, it is often more
chronic. Table 7-3 compares the different approaches to diagnosing.
The most typical feature of dysthymia, also known as persistent depressive
disorder, is the presence of a depressed mood that lasts most of the day and is
present almost continuously. There are associated feelings of inadequacy,
guilt, irritability, and anger; withdrawal from society; loss of interest; and
inactivity and lack of productivity. The term dysthymia, which means “ill-
humored,” was introduced in 1980. Before that time, we tended to classify
patients having dysthymia as having “neurotic depression.”
Dysthymia is distinguished from major depressive disorder by the fact that
patients complain that they have always been depressed. Thus, most cases are
of early-onset, beginning in childhood or adolescence, and, almost always, by
a patient’s 20s.
Table 7-3
Dysthymic Disorder
 
DSM-5
ICD-10
Diagnostic name
Persistent Depressive
Disorder
Dysthymia [F43.1]
Duration
2+ yr (1+ yr for children)
≤2-mo symptom free
during illness
 
Symptoms
Depressed mood most of
the time
↓ appetite
↓ or ↑ sleep
↓ energy
↓ self-esteem
↓ concentration/decision-
making ability
Hopelessness
Chronically depressed
mood that does not
meet criteria for a
depressive
episode, though
criteria may have
been met in the
past
Required number
of symptoms
First symptom and 2+ of
rest
 
Psychosocial
consequences
of symptoms
Distress and functional
impairment
 
Exclusions
History of bipolar disorder
Another mental illness
Substance
Another medical illness
Anxiety
Depression
Bereavement
Schizophrenia
Symptom
With pure dysthymic
 
specifiers
syndrome: criteria for
depressive episode not
met in the last 2 yr
With persistent major
depressive episode:
has met diagnostic
criteria for a
depressive episode for
entire 2-yr period
With intermittent major
depressive episode,
with current episode:
in current episode, 8
wk+ in last 2 yr with
subdiagnostic
symptoms episode
With intermittent major
depressive episode,
without current
episode: Not currently
in episode, 1+
depressive episode in
past 2 yr
With anxious distress
≥2 of following:
•  Feeling tense
•  Restlessness
•  ↓ concentration due
to worrying
•  ↑ fear without
apparent cause
•  Fear of loss of control
With mixed features
—depressive or
manic/hypomanic
episode, + with
additional symptoms of
other episode but
subdiagnostic
With melancholic
features: see Table 7-
2
With atypical features:
see Table 7-2
With psychotic features
•  Mood-congruent
•  Mood-incongruent
Course specifiers With peripartum onset—
episode is during
pregnancy or ≤4 wk
after delivery
 
Severity
specifiers
Mild: minimal symptoms
Moderate: between mild
and severe
Severe: # of symptoms
and
severity/dysfunction
well beyond that
required for diagnosis
 
A 27-year-old male grade-school teacher presented with the chief
complaint that life was a painful duty that had always lacked luster for
him. He said that he felt “enveloped by a sense of gloom” that was nearly
always with him. Although he was respected by his peers, he felt “like a
grotesque failure, a self-concept I have had since childhood.” He stated
that he merely performed his responsibilities as a teacher and that he had
never derived any pleasure from anything he had done in life. He said
that he had never had any romantic feelings; sexual activity, in which he
had engaged with two different women, had involved pleasureless
orgasm. He said that he felt empty, going through life without any sense
of direction, ambition, or passion, a realization that itself was tormenting.
He had bought a pistol to put an end to what he called his “useless
existence” but did not carry out suicide, believing that it would hurt his
students and the small community in which he lived. (Courtesy of HS
Akiskal, M.D.)
A late-onset subtype, much less prevalent and not well characterized
clinically, has been identified among middle-aged and geriatric populations,
mainly through epidemiologic studies in the community.
The family history of patients with dysthymia is typically replete with both
depressive and bipolar disorders, which is one of the more robust findings
supporting its link to primary mood disorder.
Other Diagnoses
Minor Depressive Disorder. Minor depressive disorder consists of
episodes of depressive symptoms that are less severe than those seen in major
depressive disorder. The difference between dysthymia and minor depressive
disorder is primarily the episodic nature of the symptoms in the latter.
Between episodes, patients with minor depressive disorder have a euthymic
mood, but patients with dysthymia have virtually no euthymic periods. DSM-
5 does not include this diagnosis. However, ICD-10 includes it as a mild type
of depressive episode. DSM-5 would diagnose it as an “Other Specified
Depressive Disorder.”
Recurrent Brief Depressive Disorder. Recurrent brief depressive
disorder consists of brief periods (less than 2 weeks) during which depressive
episodes are present. Patients with the disorder would meet the diagnostic
criteria for a major depressive disorder if their episodes lasted longer. Patients
with recurrent brief depressive disorder differ from patients with dysthymia
on two counts: they have an episodic disorder, and their symptoms are more
severe. ICD-10 lists this as an “Other Recurrent Mood Disorder,” whereas
DSM-5 would diagnose it as an “Other Specified Depressive Disorder.”
Double Depression. An estimated 40 percent of patients with major
depressive disorder also meet the criteria for dysthymia, a combination often
referred to as a double depression. Available data support the conclusion that
patients with double depression have poorer prognoses than patients with
major depressive disorder alone. The treatment of patients with double
depression should be directed toward both disorders because the resolution of
the symptoms of major depressive episode still leaves these patients with
significant psychiatric impairment.
Objective Rating Scales for Depression
There is a growing literature suggesting that the use of objective scales can
significantly improve the reliability of depressive diagnoses. They can also be
useful for tracking the course of an episode. Several validated scales exist.
Clinician Administered Scales. The Hamilton Rating Scale for
Depression (HAM-D) is a widely used depression scale. It contains up to 24
items, each rated on a 0 to 4 or 0 to 2 scale. The clinician evaluates the
patient’s answers to questions about feelings of guilt, thoughts of suicide,
sleep habits, and other symptoms of depression, and derives the ratings from
that interview. The usual scoring cutoffs are 10 to 13 for mild depression, 14
to 17 for mild-to-moderate depression, and >17 for moderate-to-severe
depression.
Self-Administered Scales. The Zung Self-Rating Depression Scale is a
20-item report scale. A normal range is 34 or less; a depressed score is 50 or
more. The scale provides a global index of the intensity of a patient’s
depressive symptoms, including the affective expression of depression.
The Raskin Depression Scale is a clinician-rated scale that measures the
severity of a patient’s depression, as reported by the patient and as observed
by the physician, on a 5-point scale of three dimensions: verbal report,
displayed behavior, and secondary symptoms. The scale has a range of 3 to
13; a normal score is 3, and a depressed score is 7 or more.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
The symptoms of depressive disorders commonly overlap with other
syndromes and disorders. As a result, the differential is wide. Often a careful
history and examination will make the differential clear. In other cases, one
may have to observe the disorder over time before the diagnosis becomes
clear.
General Medical Disorders
It is essential to consider whether a patient’s depression is due to a general
medical condition. Failure to obtain a good clinical history or to consider the
context of a patient’s current life situation can lead to diagnostic errors.
Clinicians should have depressed adolescents tested for mononucleosis, and
we should test patients who are markedly overweight or underweight for
adrenal and thyroid dysfunctions. We should test patients with appropriate
risk factors for HIV, and older patients for viral pneumonia and other medical
conditions.
Table 7-4 lists some pharmacologic and medical conditions that can cause
depression.
Table 7-4
Pharmacologic Factors and Physical Diseases Associated
with Onset of Depression
Pharmacologic
Steroidal contraceptives
Reserpine, methyldopa
Anticholinesterase insecticides
Amphetamine or cocaine withdrawal
Alcohol or sedative–hypnotic withdrawal
Cimetidine, indomethacin
Phenothiazine antipsychotic drugs
Thallium, mercury
Cycloserine
Vincristine, vinblastine
Interferon
Endocrine–metabolica
Hypothyroidism and hyperthyroidism
Hyperparathyroidism
Hypopituitarism
Addison disease
Cushing syndrome
Diabetes mellitus
Infectious
General paresis (tertiary syphilis)
Toxoplasmosis
Influenza, viral pneumonia
Viral hepatitis
Infectious mononucleosis
Acquired immune deficiency syndrome
Collagen
Rheumatoid arthritis
Lupus erythematosus
Nutritional
Pellagra
Pernicious anemia
Neurologic
Multiple sclerosis
Parkinson disease
Head trauma
Complex partial seizures
Sleep apnea
Cerebral tumors
Cerebrovascular infarction (and disease)
Neoplastic
Abdominal malignancies
Disseminated carcinomatosis
aCholesterol is not mentioned because low levels as a factor in depression have been
inconsistently reported.
Many neurologic and medical disorders and pharmacologic agents can
produce symptoms of depression. Patients with depressive disorders often
first visit their general practitioners with somatic complaints. We can detect
most medical causes of depressive disorders with a comprehensive medical
history, a complete physical and neurologic examination, and routine blood
and urine tests. The workup should include tests for thyroid and adrenal
functions because disorders of both of these endocrine systems can appear as
depressive disorders. In substance-induced mood disorder, a reasonable rule
of thumb is that any drug a depressed patient is taking should be considered a
potential factor in the mood disorder. Cardiac drugs, antihypertensives,
sedatives, hypnotics, antipsychotics, antiepileptics, antiparkinsonian drugs,
analgesics, antibacterials, and antineoplastics are all commonly associated
with depressive symptoms.
Neurologic Conditions
The most common neurologic problems that manifest depressive symptoms
are Parkinson disease, dementing illnesses, epilepsy, cerebrovascular
diseases, and tumors. About 50 to 75 percent of all patients with Parkinson
disease have marked symptoms of depressive disorder that do not correlate
with the patient’s physical disability, age, or duration of illness but do
correlate with the presence of abnormalities found on neuropsychological
tests. The motor symptoms of Parkinson disease can mask a depressive
disorder as the motor symptoms are similar. Depressive symptoms often
respond to antidepressant drugs or ECT. The interictal changes associated
with temporal lobe epilepsy can mimic a depressive disorder, especially if the
epileptic focus is on the right side. Depression is a frequent complicating
feature of cerebrovascular diseases, particularly in the 2 years after the
episode. Depression is more common in anterior brain lesions than in
posterior brain lesions and, in both cases, often responds to antidepressant
medications. Tumors of the diencephalic and temporal regions are
particularly likely to be associated with depressive disorder symptoms.
Dementia. Major depressive disorder can have a profound effect on
concentration and even memory, and can occasionally be confused with a
neurodegenerative illness such as Alzheimer disorder. At times the term
“pseudodementia” has been used to describe this. However, that may be ill-
advised as it implies that the cognitive symptoms are not genuine, which is
not the case. Clinicians can usually differentiate cognitive symptoms of a
major depressive disorder from the dementia of a disease, such as dementia
of the Alzheimer type, on clinical grounds. The cognitive symptoms in major
depressive disorder have a sudden onset, and other symptoms of the disorder,
such as self-reproach, are also present. A diurnal variation in the cognitive
problems, not seen in primary dementias, may occur. Whereas depressed
patients with cognitive difficulties often do not try to answer questions,
patients with dementia may confabulate. During an interview, depressed
patients can sometimes be coached and encouraged into remembering, an
ability that demented patients lack.
Other Mental Disorders
Depression can be a feature of virtually any mental disorder.
Other Mood Disorders. Clinicians must consider a range of diagnostic
categories before arriving at a final diagnosis. We should determine whether
a patient has had episodes of mania-like symptoms, which might indicate any
one of the bipolar disorders. The depressive episode of a bipolar disorder may
be identical to that of a major depressive disorder. However, there may be
certain features that are more predictive of a bipolar disorder, and we list
these in Table 7-5.
Table 7-5
Features of a Depressive Episode that Are More Predictive
of Bipolar Disorder
Early age at onset
Psychotic depression before 25 yr of age
Postpartum depression, especially one with psychotic features
Rapid onset and offset of depressive episodes of short duration (less
than 3 mo)
Recurrent depression (more than five episodes)
Depression with marked psychomotor retardation
Atypical features (reverse vegetative signs)
Seasonality
Bipolar family history
High-density three-generation pedigrees
Trait mood lability (cyclothymia)
Hyperthymic temperament
Hypomania associated with antidepressants
Repeated (at least three times) loss of efficacy of antidepressants
after initial response
Depressive mixed state (with psychomotor excitement, irritable
hostility, racing thoughts, and sexual arousal during major
depression)
From Akiskal. Mood disorders. In: Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz P, eds. Kaplan & Sadock’s
Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry. 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Wolters Kluwer; 2017.
If a patient’s symptoms are solely depressive, the patient most likely has a
depressive disorder. Even then, we must differentiate between the various
depressive disorders discussed in this chapter. To do this, we must understand
the severity and the course of the disorder in detail.
Other Mental Disorders. Substance-related disorders, psychotic disorders
(Table 7-6), eating disorders, adjustment disorders, and somatoform disorders
are all commonly associated with depressive symptoms and should be
considered in the differential diagnosis of a patient with depressive
symptoms.
Perhaps the most challenging differential is that between anxiety disorders
with depression and depressive disorders with marked anxiety. Table 7-7
compares the unique features of depression with those of anxiety.
Table 7-6
Common Causes of Misdiagnosis of Mood Disorder as
Schizophrenia
Reliance on cross-sectional rather than longitudinal picture
Incomplete interepisodic recovery equated with schizophrenic defect
Equation of bizarreness with schizophrenic thought disorder
Ascribing irritable and cantankerous mood to paranoid delusions
Mistaking depressive anhedonia and depersonalization for
schizophrenic emotional blunting
Flight of ideas perceived as loose associations
Lack of familiarity with the phenomenologic approach in assessing
affective delusions and hallucinations
Heavy weight given to incidental Schneiderian symptoms
Adapted from Akiskal HS, Puzantian VR. Psychotic forms of depression and mania. Psychiatr
Clin North Am. 1979;2:419.
Table 7-7
Unique Cross-Sectional Profiles of Clinical Anxiety and
Depression
Anxiety
Depression
Hypervigilance
Psychomotor retardation
Severe tension and panic
Severe sadness
Perceived danger
Perceived loss
Phobic avoidance
Loss of interest—anhedonia
Doubt and uncertainty
Hopelessness—suicidal
Insecurity
Self-deprecation
Performance anxiety
Loss of libido
 
Early-morning awakening
 
Weight loss
Reprinted with permission from Akiskal HS. Toward a clinical understanding of the
relationship of anxiety and depressive disorders. In: Maser JP, Cloninger CR, eds.
Comorbidity of Mood and Anxiety Disorders. Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Press;
1990.
Uncomplicated Bereavement. Uncomplicated bereavement is not a
mental disorder even though about one-third of all bereaved spouses for a
time meet the diagnostic criteria for major depressive disorder. Some patients
with uncomplicated bereavement do develop a major depressive disorder, but
we do not make this diagnosis unless the grief does not resolve. The severity
and course of symptoms are significant differences. Table 7-8 lists features
that would indicate that normal bereavement has progressed to a depressive
disorder.
A 75-year-old widow was brought to treatment by her daughter because
of severe insomnia and total loss of interest in daily routines after her
husband’s death 1 year before. She had been agitated for the first 2 to 3
months and thereafter “sank into total inactivity—not wanting to get out
of bed, not wanting to do anything, not wanting to go out.” According to
her daughter, she was married at 21 years of age, had four children, and
had been a housewife until her husband’s death from a heart attack. Her
past psychiatric history was negative; premorbid adjustment had been
characterized by compulsive traits. During the interview, she was dressed
in black; appeared moderately slowed; and sobbed intermittently, saying
“I search everywhere for him …. I don’t find him.” When asked about
life, she said, “Everything I see is black.” Although she expressed no
interest in food, she did not seem to have lost an appreciable amount of
weight. The patient declined psychiatric care, stating that she “preferred
to join her husband rather than get well.” She was too religious to commit
suicide, but by refusing treatment, she felt that she would “pine away …
find relief in death and reunion.” (Courtesy of HS Akiskal, M.D.)
In cases of severe bereavement, regardless of diagnosis, some suggest that
it would be clinically unwise to withhold antidepressants from many persons
experiencing such intense mourning.
COMORBIDITY
Individuals with major depressive disorders are at an increased risk of having
one or more additional comorbid disorders. The most frequent disorders are
alcohol abuse or dependence, panic disorder, obsessive-compulsive disorder
(OCD), and social anxiety disorder. Conversely, individuals with substance
use disorders and anxiety disorders also have an elevated risk of lifetime or
current comorbid depressive disorders.
Table 7-8
Signs that a Bereaved Person Has Progressed to a
Depressive Disorder
Beliefs. Grieving persons and their relatives perceive bereavement
as a normal reaction, whereas those with depressive disorder
often view themselves as sick and may actually believe they are
losing their minds.
Emotional reactivity. Unlike the melancholic person, the grieving
person reacts to the environment and tends to show a range of
positive effects.
Psychomotor activity. Marked psychomotor retardation is not
observed in normal grief.
Guilt. Although bereaved persons often feel guilty about not having
done certain things that they believe might have saved the life of
the deceased loved one (guilt of omission), they typically do not
experience guilt of commission.
Delusions. Delusions of worthlessness or sin and psychotic
experiences in general point toward mood disorder.
Suicidal ideation. Active suicidal ideation is rare in grief but common
in major depressive disorder.
Behaviors. “Mummification” (i.e., keeping the belongings of the
deceased person exactly as they were before his or her death)
indicates serious psychopathology.
Anniversaries. Severe anniversary reactions should alert the
clinician to the possibility of psychopathology.
From Akiskal. Mood disorders. In: Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz P, eds. Kaplan & Sadock’s
Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry. 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Wolters Kluwer; 2017.
Anxiety
In anxiety disorders, DSM-5 notes the existence of mixed anxiety–depressive
disorder. Significant symptoms of anxiety can and often do coexist with
significant symptoms of depression. Whether patients who exhibit significant
symptoms of both anxiety and depression are affected by two distinct disease
processes or by a single disease process that produces both sets of symptoms
are not yet resolved. Patients of both types may constitute a group of patients
with mixed anxiety–depressive disorder.
Substance Use Disorder
Alcohol dependence frequently coexists with mood disorders. Both patients
with major depressive disorder and those with bipolar I disorder are likely to
meet the diagnostic criteria for an alcohol use disorder. The available data
indicate that alcohol dependence is more strongly associated with a
coexisting diagnosis of depression in women than in men. In contrast, the
genetic and family data about men who have both a mood disorder and
alcohol dependence indicate that they are likely to have two genetically
distinct disease processes.
Substance-related disorders other than alcohol dependence are also
commonly associated with mood disorders. The abuse of substances may be
involved in precipitating an episode of illness or, conversely, may represent
patients’ attempts to treat their illnesses. Although manic patients seldom use
sedatives to dampen their euphoria, depressed patients often use stimulants,
such as cocaine and amphetamines, to relieve their depression.
Patients with dysthymia commonly meet the diagnostic criteria for a
substance-related disorder. This comorbidity can be logical; patients with
dysthymia tend to develop coping methods for their chronically depressed
state that involve substance abuse. Therefore, they are likely to use alcohol,
stimulants such as cocaine, or marijuana, the choice perhaps depending
primarily on a patient’s social context. The presence of a comorbid diagnosis
of substance abuse presents a diagnostic dilemma for clinicians; the long-
term use of many substances can result in a symptom picture
indistinguishable from that of dysthymia.
Medical Conditions
Depression commonly coexists with medical conditions, especially in older
persons. When depression and medical conditions coexist, clinicians must try
to 
determine 
whether 
the 
underlying 
medical 
condition 
is
pathophysiologically related to the depression or whether any drugs that the
patient is taking for the medical condition are causing the depression. Many
studies indicate that the treatment of a coexisting major depressive disorder
can improve the course of the underlying medical disorder, including cancer.
COURSE
Studies of the course and prognosis of mood disorders have generally
concluded that mood disorders tend to have long courses and that patients
tend to have relapses.
Major Depressive Disorder
Onset. About 50 percent of patients having their first episode of major
depressive disorder exhibited significant depressive symptoms before the first
identified episode. Therefore, early identification and treatment of early
symptoms may prevent the development of a full depressive episode.
Although symptoms may have been present, patients with major depressive
disorder usually have not had a premorbid personality disorder. The first
depressive episode occurs before age 40 years in about 50 percent of patients.
Later onset is associated with the absence of a family history of mood
disorders, antisocial personality disorder, and alcohol abuse.
Duration. An untreated depressive episode lasts 6 to 13 months; most
treated episodes last about 3 months. The withdrawal of antidepressants
before 3 months has elapsed almost always results in the return of the
symptoms. As the course of the disorder progresses, patients tend to have
more frequent episodes that last longer. Over 20 years, the mean number of
episodes is five or six.
Other Depressive Disorders
About 50 percent of patients with dysthymia experience an insidious onset of
symptoms before age 25 years. Despite the early onset, patients often suffer
from the symptoms for a decade before seeking psychiatric help and may
consider early-onset dysthymia part of life. Patients with an early onset of
symptoms are at risk for either major depressive disorder or bipolar I disorder
in the course of their disorder. Studies of patients with the diagnosis of
dysthymia indicate that about 20 percent progressed to major depressive
disorder, 15 percent to bipolar II disorder, and fewer than 5 percent to bipolar
I disorder.
The prognosis for patients with dysthymia varies. Antidepressive agents
and specific types of psychotherapies (e.g., cognitive and behavior therapies)
have positive effects on the course and prognosis of dysthymia. The available
data about previously available treatments indicate that only 10 to 15 percent
of patients are in remission 1 year after the initial diagnosis. About 25 percent
of all patients with dysthymia never attain complete recovery. Overall,
however, the prognosis is good with treatment.
PROGNOSIS
Major depressive disorder is not a benign disorder. It tends to be chronic, and
patients tend to relapse. Patients hospitalized for the first episode of major
depressive disorder have about a 50 percent chance of recovering in the first
year. The percentage of patients recovering after repeated hospitalization
decreases with time. Many unrecovered patients remain affected by a
dysthymic disorder. About 25 percent of patients have a recurrence in the
first 6 months after leaving the hospital. Another 30 to 50 percent recur in the
following 2 years. About 50 to 75 percent of all patients will have a
recurrence within 5 years. The incidence of relapse is lower than these figures
in patients who continue prophylactic psychopharmacological treatment and
in patients who have had only one or two depressive episodes. In general, as
a patient experiences more and more depressive episodes, the time between
the episodes decreases, and the severity of each episode increases.
Prognostic Indicators
Many studies have focused on identifying both good and bad prognostic
indicators in the course of major depressive disorder. Table 7-9 lists some of
the positive and negative predictors.
TREATMENT APPROACH
The treatment of mood disorders is rewarding for psychiatrists. Specific
treatments are available for depressive episodes, and data indicate that
prophylactic treatment is also useful. We should be optimistic, as the
prognosis for each episode is excellent. This fact tends to be welcome news
for patients and families. Mood disorders are chronic, however, and the
psychiatrist must educate the patient and the family about future treatment
strategies.
Historically, patients with dysthymia either received no treatment or
received long-term, insight-oriented psychotherapy. Contemporary data
suggest that the treatments for dysthymia are similar to those for major
depressive disorder.
There are several treatment goals. First, the patient’s safety must be
guaranteed. Second, a complete diagnostic evaluation of the patient is
necessary. Third, we should initiate a treatment plan that addresses not only
the immediate symptoms but also the patient’s prospective well-being.
Although current treatment emphasizes pharmacotherapy and psychotherapy
addressed to the individual patient, stressful life events increase the chance of
relapse. Thus, treatment should address the number and severity of stressors
in patients’ lives.
Table 7-10 lists the phases of treatment and the typical goals and activities
for each phase.
Table 7-9
Prognostic Indicators for Depression
Positive Indicators
Clinical
Mild severity
No psychotic symptoms
Short hospital stay
No comorbid disease (medical/psychiatric)
No more than 1 hospitalization
Advanced age of onset
Psychosocial
Solid friendships during adolescence
Stable family functioning
Good social/occupational functioning in previous 5 yr
Negative Indicators
Comorbid dysthymic disorder and major depressive disorder
Substance use disorder
Anxiety symptoms
>1 previous episodes
Male
Hospitalization
The first and most critical decision a physician must make is whether to
hospitalize a patient or attempt outpatient treatment. Definite indications for
hospitalization are the risk of suicide or homicide, a patient’s grossly reduced
ability to get food and shelter, and the need for diagnostic procedures. A
history of rapidly progressing symptoms and the rupture of a patient’s natural
support systems are also indications for hospitalization.
A physician may safely treat dysthymia and other forms of milder
depression in the office, seeing the patient frequently. Clinical signs of
impaired judgment, weight loss, or insomnia should be minimal. The
patient’s support system should be reliable, neither overinvolved nor
withdrawing from the patient. Any adverse changes in the patient’s
symptoms or behavior or the attitude of the patient’s support system may
suffice to warrant hospitalization.
Patients with mood disorders are often unwilling to enter a hospital
voluntarily, and we may have to commit them involuntarily. These patients
often cannot make decisions because of their slowed thinking, negative
Weltanschauung (world view), and hopelessness.
Choosing a Treatment
Combined Treatments May Offer the Best Option. We often combine
medication and psychotherapy. If physicians view mood disorders as
fundamentally evolving from psychodynamic issues, their ambivalence about
the use of drugs may result in a poor response, noncompliance, and probably
inadequate dosages for too short a treatment period. Alternatively, if
physicians ignore the psychosocial needs of a patient, the outcome of
pharmacotherapy may be compromised. Several trials of a combination of
pharmacotherapy and psychotherapy for chronically depressed outpatients
have shown a higher response and higher remission rates for the combination
than for either treatment used alone.
Although combination remains the general—and our—recommendation—
we should point out that there are other views. Some have argued that most
data suggest that single treatment, either psychopharmacological or
psychotherapeutic, alone is sufficient for most people, and that combining
treatments exposes patients to unnecessary costs and adverse effects.
Somatic Treatments
Pharmacotherapy. The efficacy of pharmacotherapy for major depressive
disorder has been well established in more than 500 randomized controlled
studies. In general, all available antidepressants show an at least modest
effect compared with placebo. Efficacy is broadly similar across agents, at
least when compared against placebo. However, tolerability and acceptability
vary.
After establishing a diagnosis, we can formulate a pharmacologic treatment
strategy. Accurate diagnosis is crucial because unipolar and bipolar spectrum
disorders require different treatment regimens.
The objective of pharmacologic treatment is symptom remission, not just
symptom reduction. Patients with residual symptoms, as opposed to full
remission, are more likely to experience a relapse or recurrence of mood
episodes and to experience ongoing impairment of daily functioning.
The use of specific pharmacotherapy approximately doubles the chances
that a depressed patient will recover in 1 month. All currently available
antidepressants may take up to 3 to 4 weeks to exert significant therapeutic
effects, although they may begin to show their effects earlier. The choice of
antidepressants partly depends on the side effect profile that is least
objectionable to a given patient’s physical status, temperament, and lifestyle.
Chapter 21 discusses the many classes of antidepressants. Although most
antidepressants seem to have similar mechanisms of action and hence similar
efficacy, there are some variations across classes. This variation gives us
some diversity of choice. Although the first antidepressant drugs, the
monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs) and tricyclic antidepressants
(TCAs), are still in use, newer compounds have made the treatment of
depression more “clinician and patient-friendly.”
Table 7-10
Phases of Treatment
Treatment
Phase
Duration Goals
Activities
Acute and
continuation
8–12 wk
Achieve
symptomatic
remission
Monitor side
effects
Restore function
Establish therapeutic
alliance
Provide
psychoeducation
Select optimal
antidepressant
treatment(s)
Supportive and
measurement-
based care
Monitor progress
Maintenance
6–24 mo
or
longer
Return to full
function and
quality of life
Prevention of
recurrence
Continue
psychoeducation
Rehabilitate
Manage
comorbidities
Monitor for
recurrence
Modified from Lam RW, McIntosh D, Wang J, Enns MW, Kolivakis T, Michalak EE, Sareen J,
Song WY, Kennedy SH, MacQueen GM, Milev RV, Parikh SV, Ravindran AV; CANMAT
Depression Work Group. Canadian Network for Mood and Anxiety Treatments (CANMAT)
2016 clinical guidelines for the management of adults with major depressive disorder: section
1. Disease burden and principles of care. Can J Psychiatry. 2016;61(9):510–523.
Table 7-11
SSRI and SNRI Antidepressant Medications and Their Side
Effect Profiles
 
 
Side Effect Frequency
Drug Class
Recommended
Dose Range
(mg)
10–30%
>30%
SSRI
 
 
 
Citalopram
20–40
Nausea, dry mouth,
sweating
None
Escitalopram
10–20
Male sexual
dysfunction and
nausea
None
Fluoxetine
20–60
Nausea, dry mouth,
somnolence,
nervousness,
anxiety,
insomnia,
tremor, anorexia
None
Fluvoxamine
100–300
Dry mouth,
Nausea
headaches,
somnolence,
agitation,
insomnia,
sweating, tremor,
anorexia,
dizziness,
constipation
Paroxetine
20–60
Nausea, diarrhea,
dry mouth,
headaches,
somnolence,
insomnia,
sweating,
asthenia, male
sexual
dysfunction,
dizziness
None
Sertraline
50–200
Nausea, diarrhea,
dry mouth,
headaches,
somnolence,
insomnia,
fatigue, tremor,
male sexual
dysfunction,
dizziness
None
SNRI
 
 
 
Venlafaxine
75–375
Headaches,
somnolence, dry
mouth,
dizziness,
nervousness,
insomnia,
Nausea
sweating, male
sexual
dysfunction
Desvenlafaxine
50–100
Dry mouth,
dizziness,
nausea,
sweating
None
Duloxetine
30–120
Nausea, dry mouth,
constipation,
insomnia, male
sexual
dysfunction
None
Levomilnacipran
20–80
Nausea, dry mouth,
headaches, male
sexual
dysfunction
None
Other Second-Generation and Novel Antidepressants
Agomelatinea
25–50
None
None
Bupropion
150–450
Insomnia, dry
mouth, nausea
Headaches
Mirtazapine
15–60
Dry mouth,
constipation,
increased
appetite, weight
gain
Somnolence
Moclobemidea
300–600
None
None
Vilazodone
10–40
Diarrhea, nausea,
headaches
None
Vortioxetine
10–20
Nausea
None
aNot routinely available in the United States.
Data from Kennedy SH, Lam RW, McIntyre RS, Tourjman SV, Bhat V, Blier P, Hasnain M,
Jollant F, Levitt AJ, MacQueen GM, McInerney SJ, McIntosh D, Milev RV, Müller DJ, Parikh
SV, Pearson NL, Ravindran AV, Uher R; CANMAT Depression Work Group. Canadian
Network for Mood and Anxiety Treatments (CANMAT) 2016 clinical guidelines for the
management of adults with major depressive disorder: section 3. Pharmacological treatments.
Can J Psychiatry. 2016;61(9):540–560; Kennedy SH, Rizvi SJ. Chapter 246: SSRIs and
related compounds. In: Stolerman I, ed. Encyclopedia of Pharmacology. New York: Springer;
2010.
Table 7-11 lists selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) and
serotonin-norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs) by class as well as their
side-effect profiles.
GENERAL CLINICAL GUIDELINES. The most common clinical mistake leading to
an unsuccessful trial of an antidepressant drug is the use of too low a dosage
for too short a time. Unless adverse events prevent it, the dosage of an
antidepressant should be raised to the maximum recommended level and
maintained at that level for at least 4 or 5 weeks before a drug trial is
considered unsuccessful. Alternatively, if a patient is improving clinically on
a low dosage of the drug, this dosage should not be raised unless clinical
improvement stops before obtaining a maximal benefit. When a patient does
not begin to respond to appropriate dosages of a drug after 2 or 3 weeks,
clinicians may decide to obtain a plasma concentration of the drug if such a
test is available. The test may indicate either noncompliance or a particularly
unusual pharmacokinetic disposition of the drug and may thereby suggest an
alternative dosage.
INITIAL MEDICATION SELECTION. The available antidepressants do not differ in
overall 
efficacy, 
speed 
of 
response, 
or 
long-term 
effectiveness.
Antidepressants, however, do differ in their pharmacology, drug–drug
interactions, short- and long-term side effects, the likelihood of
discontinuation symptoms, and ease of dose adjustment. Most often, we start
with second- and third-generation antidepressants. Among them, the selective
serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) remain the most commonly used
medications for depression.
Selection of the initial treatment depends on the chronicity of the
condition, course of illness (a recurrent or chronic course increases the
likelihood of subsequent depressive symptoms without treatment), family
history of illness and treatment response, symptom severity, concurrent
general medical or other psychiatric conditions, prior treatment responses to
other acute-phase treatments, potential drug–drug interactions, and patient
preference.
In general, approximately 45 to 60 percent of all outpatients with
uncomplicated (i.e., minimal psychiatric and general medical comorbidity),
nonchronic, nonpsychotic major depressive disorder who begin treatment
with medication respond (i.e., achieve at least a 50 percent reduction in
baseline symptoms); however, only 35 to 50 percent achieve remission (i.e.,
the virtual absence of depressive symptoms).
DURATION AND PROPHYLAXIS. We should maintain antidepressant treatment
for at least 6 months or the length of a previous episode, whichever is greater.
When discontinuing antidepressant treatment, the drug dose should be
tapered gradually over 1 to 2 weeks, depending on the half-life of the
particular compound.
Prophylactic treatment with antidepressants is effective in reducing the
number and severity of recurrences. One study concluded that when episodes
are less than 21/2 years apart, we should recommend prophylactic treatment.
Another factor suggesting prophylactic treatment is the seriousness of
previous depressive episodes. Episodes that have involved significant suicidal
ideation or impairment of psychosocial functioning may indicate that the risk
of stopping treatment is too considerable.
Prevention of new mood episodes (i.e., recurrences) is the aim of the
maintenance phase of treatment. Only patients with recurrent or chronic
depressions are candidates for maintenance treatment. Several studies
indicate that maintenance antidepressant medication appears to be safe and
effective for the treatment of chronic depression.
TREATMENT OF SPECIFIC DEPRESSIVE DISORDERS. Clinical types of major
depressive episodes may have varying responses to particular antidepressants
or drugs other than antidepressants. Antidepressants with dual action on both
serotonergic and noradrenergic receptors may have greater efficacy in
melancholic depressions. We can treat patients with seasonal winter
depression with light therapy.
Treatment of major depressive episodes with psychotic features may
require a combination of an antidepressant and an atypical antipsychotic.
Several studies have also shown that ECT is useful for this indication—
perhaps more effective than pharmacotherapy.
For those with atypical symptom features, strong evidence exists for the
effectiveness of MAOIs. SSRIs and bupropion are also of use in atypical
depression.
COMORBID DISORDERS. The simultaneous presence of another disorder can
affect initial treatment selection. For example, the successful treatment of an
OCD associated with depressive symptoms usually results in remission of the
depression. Similarly, when panic disorder occurs with major depression,
medications with demonstrated efficacy in both conditions are preferred (e.g.,
tricyclics and SSRIs). In general, the nonmood disorder dictates the choice of
treatment in comorbid states.
Concurrent substance abuse raises the possibility of a substance-induced
mood disorder, which must be evaluated by history or by requiring
abstinence for several weeks. Abstinence often results in remission of
depressive symptoms in substance-induced mood disorders. For those with
continuing significant depressive symptoms, even with abstinence, an
independent mood disorder is diagnosed and treated.
General medical conditions are established risk factors in the development
of depression. The presence of a major depressive episode is associated with
increased morbidity or mortality of many general medical conditions (e.g.,
cardiovascular disease, diabetes, cerebrovascular disease, and cancer).
THERAPEUTIC USE OF SIDE EFFECTS. Choosing more sedating antidepressants
(such as mirtazapine or paroxetine) for more anxious, depressed patients or
more activating agents (bupropion) for more psychomotor-retarded patients is
not as helpful as one might think. For example, any short-term benefits with
paroxetine or mirtazapine on symptoms of anxiety or insomnia may become
liabilities over time. These drugs often continue to be sedating in the longer
run, which can lead to patients prematurely discontinuing medication and
increase the risk of relapse or recurrence. Some practitioners use adjunctive
medications, such as hypnotics or anxiolytics, combined with antidepressants
to provide more immediate symptom relief or to cover those side effects to
which most patients ultimately adapt.
Understanding a patient’s prior treatment history is essential because an
earlier response typically predicts future responses. A documented failure on
a properly conducted trial of a particular antidepressant class is grounds to
choose an agent from an alternative class. The history of a first-degree
relative responding to a particular drug is associated with a positive response
to the same class of agents in the patient.
ACUTE TREATMENT FAILURES. Patients may not respond to medication,
because (1) they cannot tolerate the side effects, even in the face of an
excellent clinical response; (2) an idiosyncratic adverse event may occur; (3)
the clinical response is not adequate; or (4) the wrong diagnosis has been
made. Acute phase medication trials should last 4 to 6 weeks to allow for
adequate time for meaningful symptom reduction. Most (but not all) patients
who ultimately respond fully show at least a partial response by the fourth
week, assuming an adequate dose. A “partial response” is defined as at least a
20 to 25 percent reduction in pretreatment depressive symptom severity.
Patients who have not even a partial response in that time likely need a
change of treatment. More extended periods—8 to 12 weeks or longer—are
needed to define the ultimate degree of symptom reduction achievable with a
medication. Approximately half of patients require a second medication
treatment trial because the initial treatment is poorly tolerated or ineffective.
Selecting Second Treatment Options. When the initial treatment is
unsuccessful, switching to an alternative treatment or augmenting the current
treatment is a standard option. The choice between switching from the single
initial treatment to a new single treatment (as opposed to adding a second
treatment to the first one) rests on the patient’s prior treatment history, the
degree of benefit achieved with the initial treatment, and patient preference.
As a rule, switching rather than augmenting is preferred after an initial
medication failure. On the other hand, augmentation strategies are helpful
with patients who have gained some benefit from the initial treatment but
who have not achieved remission. A review of the different strategies
suggested there is some evidence suggesting that both strategies do confer
some benefit. However, the evidence is inadequate to suggest one strategy
over another.
When switching from one monotherapy to another, the usual suggestion is
to pick a medication in a different class. For example, we might switch from
an SSRI to an SNRI. However, when putting these assumptions to the test, it
is difficult to find any advantage for any particular strategy. For example, in
the landmark STAR*D study, which remains one of the most extensive
studies of treatment strategies following initial failure, although medication
switches were modestly helpful, both switches within and outside a class
were equally effective.
Among augmentation options, several approaches have reasonable
evidence. Several antipsychotics, most notably quetiapine and aripiprazole,
are effective for augmentation. Lithium augmentation is also effective for
augmenting both SSRIs and TCAs. There are also positive studies of thyroid
hormone. However, this strategy is rarely used in clinical practice owing to
the need for ongoing monitoring and potential adverse effects. Several other
agents have been studied, including bupropion, buspirone, lamotrigine,
methylphenidate, and pindolol; however, these have limited placebo-
controlled data. One meta-analysis of the available data on switching
strategies concluded that quetiapine and aripiprazole have the best evidence
as augmentation agents. However, we should use these cautiously given their
side effect profile.
NOVEL PHARMACOLOGIC AGENTS
Ketamine. The anesthetic agent ketamine is effective in treatment-resistant
depression. It has a mechanism of action that inhibits the postsynaptic
glutamate-binding protein N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor. Because
abnormalities in glutamatergic signaling seem to have a role in major
depressive disorder, this may account for its efficacy. Until recently,
ketamine was only available intravenously, limiting its use as we had to
monitor patients while they received an infusion of the drug over 30 minutes
in a clinical setting. The most common side effects are dizziness, headache,
and poor coordination, which are transitory. Dissociative symptoms,
including hallucinations, may also occur. A positive response is usually seen
within 24 hours, making this a genuinely novel substance in that it appears to
act much more rapidly than standard antidepressants. However, the effect
seems to be short-lived, and wears off after between 2 and 7 days, again
limiting its use. There are little data on longer-term treatment as well as
concern over associated adverse effects, particularly the psychogenic effect.
Also, the agent has an abuse potential, making it less attractive as a long-term
option.
More recently, esketamine in a nasal spray formulation was approved by
the FDA for treatment-resistant depression. Given the abuse risk, it is only
available through a restricted distribution system. Most of the supportive
evidence for the agent is from short-term use. However, one longer-term
study suggested that continuation treatment could be effective for some
patients.
Brexanolone. 
Brexanolone 
is 
an 
intravenous 
formulation 
of
allopregnanolone, which was approved by the FDA in 2019 for the treatment
of postpartum depression. It is a neuroactive steroid that also has a
neuroactive effect, functioning as an allosteric modulator of GABAA, which
may be central to the mechanism of postpartum depression. It is also only
available in the United States through a restricted program that requires
administrating the drug in a clinical setting over 60 hours. The most common
adverse effects are sleepiness, dry mouth, loss of consciousness, and flushing.
As with ketamine, brexanolone differs from standard antidepressants in its
apparent rapid effect, reducing depressive symptoms as early as 24 hours
after administration. In trials, the effect continued for at least 30 days. As of
this writing, phase 3 trials for an oral version of the medication have
promising results.
Other Somatic Treatments
NEUROSTIMULATION
Vagal Nerve Stimulation. Experimental stimulation of the vagus nerve in
several studies designed for the treatment of epilepsy found that patients
showed improved mood. This observation led to the use of left vagal nerve
stimulation (VNS) using an electronic device implanted in the skin, similar to
a cardiac pacemaker. Preliminary studies have shown that many patients with
chronic, recurrent major depressive disorder went into remission when treated
with VNS. The mechanism of action of VNS to account for improvement is
unknown. The vagus nerve connects to the enteric nervous system and, when
stimulated, may cause the release of peptides that act as neurotransmitters.
Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation. Transcranial magnetic stimulation
(TMS) shows promise as a treatment for depression. It involves the use of
very short pulses of magnetic energy to stimulate nerve cells in the brain. The
FDA has indicated this treatment for depression in adult patients who have
failed to achieve satisfactory improvement from one prior antidepressant
medication at or above the minimal effective dose and duration in the current
episode.
Repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation (rTMS) produces focal
secondary electrical stimulation of targeted cortical regions. It is
nonconvulsive, requires no anesthesia, has a safe side effect profile, and is
not associated with cognitive side effects.
The patients do not require anesthesia or sedation and remain awake and
alert. It is a 40-minute outpatient procedure that is prescribed by a
psychiatrist and performed in a psychiatrist’s office. The treatment is
typically administered daily for 4 to 6 weeks. The most common adverse
event related to treatment was scalp pain or discomfort.
TMS therapy is contraindicated in patients with implanted metallic devices
or nonremovable metallic objects in or around the head.
PHOTOTHERAPY. Phototherapy (light therapy) was introduced in 1984 as a
treatment for SAD (mood disorder with seasonal pattern). In this disorder,
patients typically experience depression as the photoperiod of the day
decreases with advancing winter. Women represent at least 75 percent of all
patients with seasonal depression, and the mean age of presentation is 40
years. Patients rarely present older than the age of 55 years with SAD.
Phototherapy typically involves exposing the affected patient to bright
light in the range of 1,500 to 10,000 lux or more, typically with a lightbox
that sits on a table or desk. Patients sit in front of the box for approximately 1
to 2 hours before dawn each day. Some patients may also benefit from
exposure after dusk. Alternatively, some manufacturers have developed light
visors, with a light source built into the brim of the hat. These light visors
allow mobility, but recent controlled studies have questioned the use of this
type of light exposure. Trials have typically lasted 1 week, but longer
treatment durations may be associated with a more significant response.
Phototherapy is usually well tolerated. Newer light sources tend to use
lower light intensities and come equipped with filters; patients are instructed
not to look directly at the light source. As with any effective antidepressant,
phototherapy, on rare occasions, has been implicated in switching some
depressed patients into mania or hypomania.
In addition to seasonal depression, the other significant indication for
phototherapy may be in sleep disorders. Phototherapy can decrease the
irritability and diminished functioning associated with shift work. Sleep
disorders in geriatric patients have reportedly improved with exposure to
bright light during the day. Likewise, some evidence suggests that jet lag
might respond to light therapy. Preliminary data indicate that phototherapy
may benefit some patients with OCD that has a seasonal variation.
SLEEP DEPRIVATION. Sleep disturbances are common in depression.
Depression can be associated with either hypersomnia or insomnia. Sleep
deprivation may temporarily relieve depression in those who have unipolar
depression. Approximately 60 percent of patients with depressive disorders
exhibit significant but transient benefits from total sleep deprivation. The
positive results usually reverse by the next night of sleep. Several strategies
have been used in an attempt to achieve a more sustained response to sleep
deprivation. One method used serial total sleep deprivation with a day or two
of normal sleep in between. This method does not achieve a sustained
antidepressant response because the depression tends to return during the
“normal sleep” days. Another approach used phase delay in the time patients
go to sleep each night, or partial sleep deprivation. In this method, patients
may stay awake from 2 AM to 10 PM daily. Up to 50 percent of patients get
same-day antidepressant effects from partial sleep deprivation, but this
benefit also tends to wear off in time. In some reports, however, serial partial
sleep deprivation has been used successfully to treat insomnia associated with
depression. The third, and probably most useful strategy combines sleep
deprivation with pharmacologic treatment of depression. Several studies have
suggested that total and partial sleep deprivation followed by immediate
treatment with an antidepressant or lithium sustains the antidepressant effects
of sleep deprivation. Likewise, several reports have suggested that sleep
deprivation accelerates the response to antidepressants. Sleep deprivation
may also improve premenstrual dysphoria.
Table 7-12
Evidence-Based Psychotherapies for Major Depressive
Disorder
Treatment
Conceptualization of
Disorder Etiology
Sample Interventions
Behavioral
therapy
Deficit of reinforcers,
including pleasant
activities and positive
interpersonal
contacts
Increase activity level
 
Structured goal setting
 
Interpersonal skills
training
Cognitive-
behavioral
therapy
Interaction of beliefs with
matching stressor
Identify and challenge
automatic thoughts
 
 
Engage in activities that
provide evidence
disproving
dysfunctional beliefs
 
 
Modify core beliefs by
reviewing evidence
Interpersonal
psychotherapy
Interpersonal
vulnerabilities arising
from early attachment
and learned
relationship patterns
Develop awareness of
patterns in primary
relationships and the
therapeutic
relationship
 
 
Interpersonal skills
training
 
 
Communication
analysis
Behavioral
marital
Marital distress
increases stress
Assertive
communication
therapy
while impairing
support resources
training
 
Active listening
exercises
 
Problem-solving skills
 
Increasing reinforcing
behaviors toward
spouse
Psychosocial Therapy
Three types of short-term psychotherapies—cognitive therapy, interpersonal
therapy, and behavior therapy—have extensive studies for the treatment of
major depressive disorder. In addition to these individual therapies, there are
positive studies for behavioral marital therapy as well. Table 7-12 lists the
evidence-based psychotherapies for major depressive disorder.
There are no generally accepted guidelines for choosing one therapy over
another. The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) Treatment of
Depression Collaborative Research Program did find some possible
predictors of good response to specific treatments. Table 7-13 summarizes
those findings.
Cognitive Therapy. Cognitive therapy, originally developed by Aaron
Beck, focuses on the cognitive distortions postulated to be present in major
depressive disorder. Such distortions include selective attention to the
negative aspects of circumstances and unrealistically morbid inferences about
consequences. For example, apathy and low energy result from a patient’s
expectation of failure in all areas. The goal of cognitive therapy is to alleviate
depressive episodes and prevent their recurrence by helping patients identify
and test negative cognitions; develop alternative, flexible, and positive ways
of thinking; and rehearse new cognitive and behavioral responses.
In this example, the therapist takes a cognitive approach when a patient
shows up late to an appointment.
Therapist: You mentioned that you were upset because you were late.
Can you tell me what you were thinking when you realized you were
late?
Patient: I figured you’d be angry.
Therapist: Okay, and when you thought I’d be angry, how did you feel?
Patient: Pretty nervous.
Therapist: So that is what we will focus on in here, how your thinking in
different situations influences how you feel. In this case, you were late,
thought “he’ll be angry,” and felt nervous. Our goal is to test out the
beliefs, like “he’ll be angry,” and change them when they aren’t healthy
or accurate. The great thing is that you sort of implicitly tested out the
belief that I’ll be angry by showing up. Was I angry?
Patient: You didn’t seem angry.
Table 7-13
Predictors 
of 
Response 
to 
Several 
Therapies 
for
Depression
Treatment
Predictors
Interpersonal psychotherapy
Low social dysfunction
High depression severity
Cognitive-behavioral therapy
Low cognitive dysfunction
Pharmacotherapy
Low cognitive dysfunction
High depression severity
High work dysfunction
Data from Sotsky SM, Glass DR, Shea MT, Pilkonis PA, Collins JF, Elkin I, Watkins JT, Imber
SD, Leber WR, Moyer J, Oliveri ME. Patient predictors of response to psychotherapy and
pharmacotherapy: findings in the NIMH Treatment of Depression Collaborative Research
Program. Am J Psychiatry. 1991;148:997–1108.
Therapist: How anxious did you feel once we started talking?
Patient: Well, I’m feeling more comfortable.
Therapist: What thoughts do you have now about me being angry?
Patient: I don’t think you’re angry.
Therapist: So, this is an example of what we’re going to be doing in
therapy—I’ll be helping you to identify thoughts that make you feel bad.
We’re then going to work together to come up with ways to check them
out and change them if they’re not true or accurate. You checked out
whether I was angry by observing me, and you changed your thought,
and, now, I get the impression that you feel better.
Studies have shown that cognitive therapy is useful in the treatment of
major depressive disorder. Most studies found that cognitive therapy is equal
in efficacy to pharmacotherapy and is associated with fewer adverse effects
and better follow-up than pharmacotherapy. Some of the best-controlled
studies have indicated that the combination of cognitive therapy and
pharmacotherapy is more efficacious than either therapy alone, although
other studies have not found that additive effect.
Interpersonal Therapy. Interpersonal therapy, developed by Gerald
Klerman, focuses on one or two of a patient’s current interpersonal problems.
This therapy has two assumptions. First, current interpersonal problems are
likely to have their roots in early dysfunctional relationships. Second, current
interpersonal problems are likely to be involved in precipitating or
perpetuating the current depressive symptoms. Controlled trials have
indicated that interpersonal therapy is effective for treatment of major
depressive disorder and, not surprisingly, may be specifically helpful in
addressing interpersonal problems. Some studies indicate that interpersonal
therapy may be the most effective method for severe major depressive
episodes when the treatment choice is psychotherapy alone.
The interpersonal therapy program usually consists of 12 to 16 weekly
sessions and is characterized by an active therapeutic approach. Intrapsychic
phenomena, such as defense mechanisms and internal conflicts, are not
addressed. Discrete behaviors—such as lack of assertiveness, impaired social
skills, and distorted thinking—may be addressed but only in the context of
their meaning in, or their effect on, interpersonal relationships.
Behavior Therapy. Behavior therapy rests on the hypothesis that
maladaptive behavioral patterns result in a person’s receiving little positive
feedback and perhaps outright rejection from society. By addressing
maladaptive behaviors in therapy, patients learn to function in the world in
such a way that they receive positive reinforcement. Behavior therapy for
major depressive disorder has not yet been the subject of many controlled
studies. The limited data indicate that it is an effective treatment for major
depressive disorder.
Psychoanalytically Oriented Therapy. Although not as well researched
as those three therapies, many clinicians use psychoanalytically oriented
psychotherapy as their primary method. What differentiates the short-term
psychotherapy methods from the psychoanalytically oriented approach are
the active and directive roles of the therapist, the directly recognizable goals,
and the endpoints for short-term therapy.
The psychoanalytic approach to mood disorders uses psychoanalytic
theories about depression. The goal of psychoanalytic psychotherapy is to
effect a change in a patient’s personality structure or character, not merely to
alleviate symptoms. Improvements in interpersonal trust, capacity for
intimacy, coping mechanisms, the capacity to grieve, and the ability to
experience a wide range of emotions are some of the aims of psychoanalytic
therapy. Treatment often requires the patient to experience periods of
heightened anxiety and distress during therapy, which may continue for
several years.
Accumulating evidence is encouraging about the efficacy of dynamic
therapy. In a randomized, controlled trial comparing psychodynamic therapy
with cognitive-behavioral therapy, the outcome of the depressed patients was
the same in the two treatments.
Family Therapy. Family therapy is usually the first-line treatment for major
depressive disorder, but increasing evidence indicates that helping a patient
with a mood disorder to reduce and cope with stress can lessen the chance of
a relapse. We should consider family therapy if the disorder jeopardizes a
patient’s marriage or family functioning or if the mood disorder is promoted
or maintained by the family situation. Family therapy examines the role of
the mood-disordered member in the overall psychological well-being of the
whole family; it also examines the role of the entire family in the
maintenance of the patient’s symptoms. Patients with mood disorders have a
high rate of divorce, and about 50 percent of all spouses report that they
would not have married or had children if they had known that the patient
was going to develop a mood disorder.
THE EPIDEMIOLOGY OF DEPRESSION
Research on the epidemiology of depression, both in the United States and
worldwide, has considerably broadened our understanding of the disorder.
We have discovered that depression is much more common than once
thought. It is also one of the more debilitating disorders known to humanity,
as it often affects individuals during what should be their most productive
years. Hence the depressive disorders are one of the most costly disorders in
society.
Measuring the Incidence and Prevalence of Major Depressive
Disorder Is Challenging
Measuring the true incidence of major depressive disorder is complicated and
highly dependent on the methods used to collect the sample, definitions of the
disorder, and the particular instruments used to measure depression. For
example, studies that use self-assessment tend to report higher incidences
than studies using clinician-rated instruments. The timing of a study likely
affects the results as well. As depressive illness become less stigmatized,
persons may be more willing to endorse symptoms of the disorder to the
well-meaning strangers who knock at their door, call their phone, or email
them and identify themselves as researchers.
Incidence and Prevalence
In a reasonably recent meta-analysis, which included 90 studies from 30
countries done from 1994 to 2014, with combined data on more than 1
million participants, the point prevalence for depression was 12.9 percent, the
1-year prevalence was 7.2 percent, and the lifetime prevalence was 10.8
percent. There was significant heterogeneity among the different studies.
FIGURE 7-1
Lifetime prevalence of major depression across the world.
In the United States, the most recent epidemiologic data is from the
National Survey on Drug Use and Health (NSDUH), sponsored by the
Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA).
Using a definition of a major depressive episode based on DSM-5, they found
the overall 1-year prevalence of a major depressive episode to be 7.1 percent,
hence very similar to the international data. Figure 7-1 summarizes some of
the international prevalence data as it related to per capita income.
Sex
An almost universal observation, independent of country or culture, is that
depression is more common in women than men. In the international meta-
analysis, the aggregate prevalence for women was 14.4 percent versus 11.5
percent in men. In the United States, women were more likely to report a
major depressive episode in the past year (8.7 percent) than men (5.3
percent).
There are various possible explanations, both biologic, psychological, and
social, for this difference. A women’s unequal status in many societies may
make women more vulnerable to depression. Although this remains a valid
hypothesis, it is notable that in societies where women have gained a better
level of status, such as many Western societies, the ratio has not significantly
changed. 
Although 
the 
explanation 
is 
undoubtedly 
complex 
and
multifactorial, the weight of existing evidence suggests that biologic
differences between men and women, such as variations in hormonal levels,
do account for at least part of this difference.
Age
The mean age of onset for major depressive disorder is about 40 years, with
50 percent of all patients having an onset between the ages of 20 and 50
years. Major depressive disorder can also begin in childhood or old age.
Some epidemiologic data suggest that the incidence of major depressive
disorder may be increasing among younger persons. For example, in the
SAMHSA study, major depressive disorder was almost twice as prevalent in
adolescents as it was in adults, the most substantial difference being seen in
adolescent females who reported a 1-year prevalence of major depression of
20 percent. The highest 1-year prevalence for major depressive disorder was
in younger adults (adults ages 18 to 25).
Marital Status
Major depressive disorder occurs most often in persons without close
interpersonal relationships and in those who are divorced or separated.
Socioeconomic and Cultural Factors
There is no proven correlation between socioeconomic status and major
depressive disorder. Depression may be more common in rural areas than in
urban areas. However, the most recent international meta-analysis described
above did not find such a difference. It may be that technology and
globalization have been able to narrow the differences between rural and
urban settings.
Racial and ethnic differences may be particularly challenging to measure
and may be highly dependent on method, approach, and locale. In the
SAMSHA study, the highest prevalence was seen in White and Native
American respondents.
THE NEUROBIOLOGY OF DEPRESSION
Since the time of Kraepelin, researchers have examined the brains, bodies,
and behaviors of depressed patients in the search for clues of the underlying
pathology of depression. This search is complicated by the fact that most
experts on depression agree what we call major depressive disorder is not a
single disease, but rather a collection of disorders with overlapping
phenomenology but different etiologies and pathologies. Although this
assumption seems likely, we have yet to find definitive subtypes or distinct
patterns that we can confidently group into separate disorders. This area of
research is a rapidly changing field, and improvements in technology,
including higher-resolution imaging, more efficient genotyping, and more
powerful computing power are getting us closer to the search for valid
“biotypes” of depression.
What follows here are examples of pathologic findings, most of which
have been reasonably replicated by different investigators. Some are long
known, others are recent. However, the growing collection of pathologic
findings is helping us to understand what is happening when a patient says
that they are “depressed.”
Depression as a Disorder of Homeostasis
Depression and the Hypothalamic–Pituitary–Adrenal Axis. We
have known for more than 50 years that, on average, depressed patients have
an overactive hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenal (HPA) axis. Compared with
controls, depressed patients have increased cortisol levels over 24 hours. We
have documented elevated HPA activity in depression via excretion of
urinary-free cortisol (UFC), 24-hour (or shorter time segments) intravenous
(IV) collections of plasma cortisol levels, salivary cortisol levels, and tests of
the integrity of feedback inhibition. Evidence of increased HPA activity is
apparent in 20 to 40 percent of depressed outpatients and 40 to 60 percent of
depressed inpatients.
This hypercortisolemia is due to increased corticotropin-releasing hormone
(CRH) from the hypothalamus, along with decreased feedback inhibition. We
can test for a disturbance of feedback inhibition using the dexamethasone test
(DST). The DST was devised in the 1980s—patients were given
dexamethasone—a synthetic steroid. This should create a negative feedback
loop, and serum cortisol should decrease. However, depressed patients show
an initial decrease but then “escape” from the suppression and return to
abnormally high levels of cortisol. Although this is a replicable finding, it is
not useful enough to be a diagnostic test, as it is neither sensitive (many
patients diagnosed with depression have a normal DST) nor specific (many
other conditions, such as Cushing syndrome, or simple environmental stress,
can cause an abnormal DST).
Postmortem studies have shown increased neurons in the hypothalamus,
which is likely what is driving the increased activity. This neuronal increase
is likely in response to chronic stress.
Elevated HPA activity is a hallmark of the mammalian stress responses
and one of the most unambiguous links between depression and the biology
of chronic stress. Hypercortisolema in depression suggests one or more of the
following central disturbances: decreased inhibitory serotonin tone, increased
drive from norepinephrine, acetylcholine (ACh), or CRH; or decreased
feedback inhibition from the hippocampus. Some studies in depressed
humans indicate that a history of early trauma is associated with increased
HPA activity accompanied by structural changes (i.e., atrophy or decreased
volume) in the cerebral cortex.
DEPRESSION ALSO AFFECTS OTHER ENDOCRINE AND RELATED REGULATORY
SYSTEMS
Thyroid Axis Activity. Approximately 5 to 10 percent of people evaluated
for depression have previously undetected thyroid dysfunction, as reflected
by an elevated basal thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) level or an increased
TSH response to a 500-mg infusion of the hypothalamic neuropeptide
thyroid-releasing hormone (TRH). Such abnormalities are often associated
with elevated antithyroid antibody levels and, unless corrected with hormone
replacement therapy, can compromise response to treatment. An even more
significant subgroup of depressed patients (e.g., 20 to 30 percent) shows a
blunted TSH response to TRH challenge. To date, the major therapeutic
implication of a blunted TSH response is evidence of an increased risk of
relapse despite preventive antidepressant therapy. Of note, unlike the
dexamethasone-suppression test (DST), blunted TSH response to TRH does
not usually normalize with effective treatment.
Growth Hormone. Growth hormone (GH) is secreted from the anterior
pituitary after stimulation by NE and dopamine. Somatostatin, a
hypothalamic neuropeptide, and CRH inhibit this secretion. Decreased CSF
somatostatin levels occur in depression, as do increased levels in mania.
Prolactin. Prolactin is released from the pituitary by serotonin stimulation
and inhibited by dopamine. Most studies have not found significant
abnormalities of basal or circadian prolactin secretion in depression, although
some see a blunted prolactin response to various serotonin agonists. This
response is uncommon among premenopausal women, suggesting that
estrogen has a moderating effect.
Brain-Derived Neurotrophic Factor. Various growth factor proteins, of
which brain-derived neurotrophic factor (or BDNF) is best understood, are
responsible for the ongoing maintenance of neurons in the brain, and
disruption of it causes a reduction in neuronal number and size. It is
challenging to measure BDNF in the living subjects, but postmortem studies
have suggested deficits in BDNF may correlate with psychopathology. For
example, some studies have found that in postmortem examination of persons
who died from suicide, the average BDNF in the prefrontal cortex (PFC) and
hippocampus was lower than for control subjects. Indirect studies in live
patients, looking at BDNF in plasma rather than the brain (the correlation
between the two is not clear), found increases in serum BDNF in depressed
patients who responded to antidepressants.
BDNF may provide clues to the relationship between chronic stress and
depression as the activity of the gene coding for this growth factor decreases
with chronic stress, as does neurogenesis.
Similarly, animal studies show that a variety of factors, including
antidepressants, estrogen, lithium, and neurostimulation, all increase BDNF
in the brain, suggesting a possible common link between known treatments
for depression.
DEPRESSION ALSO DISRUPTS CIRCADIAN RHYTHM. It has also long been known
that depression is associated with a premature loss of deep (slow-wave) sleep
and an increase in nocturnal arousal. Four types of disturbance reflect the
latter: (1) an increase in nocturnal awakenings, (2) a reduction in total sleep
time, (3) increased phasic rapid eye movement (REM) sleep, and (4)
increased core body temperature. The combination of increased REM drive
and decreased slow-wave sleep results in a significant reduction in the first
period of non-REM (NREM) sleep, a phenomenon referred to as reduced
REM latency. Blunted secretion of GH may cause this reduction in latency,
which usually increases with sleep onset. It is very persistent, often lasting
beyond 
recovery 
from 
depression. 
Some 
patients 
manifesting 
a
characteristically abnormal sleep profile are known to be less responsive to
psychotherapy and to have a higher risk of relapse or recurrence and may
benefit preferentially from pharmacotherapy.
As with the HPA access, the association between sleep disturbances and
depression is common, but it is neither sensitive nor specific enough for
clinical use. About 40 percent of outpatients and 80 percent of inpatients
show a typical pattern of reduced REM latency, increased REM density, and
decreased sleep maintenance. False-negative findings are common in
younger, hypersomnolent patients, who may experience an increase in slow-
wave sleep during episodes of depression. Approximately 10 percent of
otherwise healthy individuals have abnormal sleep profiles, as do many
patients suffering from other medical or psychiatric disorders.
Neurotransmitter Deficits Are Involved. Much of the research into the
neurobiology of depression has centered on the role played by
neurotransmitters. This approach was understandable, given that most
somatic treatments for depression appear to act by influencing
neurotransmission. In the 1950s, researchers found that reserpine, an
antihypertensive that acts by inhibiting the release of monoamine
neurotransmitters, sometimes induced depression. During the same decade,
others discovered the earliest antidepressants. Although the discoveries were
serendipitous, it eventually became clear that they all interfered with the
catabolism of monoamine neurotransmitters, and researchers presumed that
this must be their mechanism of action. It was reasonable, then, to assume
that depression was due to abnormally low levels of these monoamines. Early
theories of depression explained the disorder as a deficit or imbalance in
neurotransmitters: hence depressed patients were often told that they had a
“chemical imbalance.” Such a simplistic theory was, of course, overly
optimistic, and subsequent neurochemical research did not find such simple
relationships. However, neurotransmitters do play an essential role in the
disorder, and subsequent findings have helped to clarify this role.
NOREPINEPHRINE. Perhaps the most compelling evidence for the central role
of the noradrenergic system in depression is the well-replicated finding that
antidepressant response is correlated with the downregulation or decreased
sensitivity of β-adrenergic receptors. Also, presynaptic β2-receptors appear to
have a role, as activation of these receptors results in a decrease in the
amount of norepinephrine released. Presynaptic β2-receptors are also located
on serotonergic neurons and regulate the amount of serotonin released.
SEROTONIN. Most modern antidepressants act on serotonin, rather than
norepinephrine, and as a result, serotonin has become the biogenic amine
neurotransmitter 
most 
commonly 
associated 
with 
depression. 
The
identification of multiple serotonin receptor subtypes has also increased the
excitement within the research community about the development of even
more specific treatments for depression. Besides treatment studies, other data
indicate that serotonin is involved in the pathophysiology of depression.
Depletion of serotonin may precipitate depression, and some patients with
suicidal impulses have low cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) concentrations of
serotonin metabolites and low concentrations of serotonin uptake sites on
platelets.
DOPAMINE. Although norepinephrine and serotonin are the biogenic amines
most often associated with the pathophysiology of depression, dopamine may
also play a role. Dopamine activity may be reduced in depression and
increased in mania. The discovery of new subtypes of the dopamine receptors
and an increased understanding of the presynaptic and postsynaptic
regulation of dopamine function have further enriched research into the
relationship between dopamine and mood disorders. Drugs that reduce
dopamine concentrations, including the reserpine mentioned above, as well as
diseases that deplete dopamine such as Parkinson disease, all may cause
depressive 
symptoms. 
In 
contrast, 
drugs 
that 
increase 
dopamine
concentrations, such as tyrosine, amphetamine, and bupropion, reduce the
symptoms of depression.
OTHER NEUROTRANSMITTER DISTURBANCES. Acetylcholine (ACh) is found in
neurons that are distributed diffusely throughout the cerebral cortex.
Cholinergic neurons have reciprocal or interactive relationships with all three
monoamine systems. Abnormal levels of choline, which is a precursor to
ACh, have been found at autopsy in the brains of some depressed patients.
Cholinergic agonists can cause symptoms of lethargy, anergia, and
psychomotor retardation. In an animal model of depression, strains of mice
that are super- or subsensitive to cholinergic agonists have been found
susceptible or more resistant to animal models of depression. Cholinergic
agonists can induce changes in HPA activity and sleep that mimic those
associated with severe depression. Some patients with mood disorders in
remission, as well as their never-ill first-degree relatives, have a trait-like
increase in sensitivity to cholinergic agonists.
γ-Aminobutyric acid (GABA) has an inhibitory effect on ascending
monoamine pathways, particularly the mesocortical and mesolimbic systems.
Reductions of GABA occur in plasma, CSF, and brain GABA levels in
depression. Animal studies have also found that chronic stress can reduce and
eventually can deplete GABA levels. By contrast, antidepressants upregulate
GABA receptors, and some GABAergic medications have weak
antidepressant effects.
The amino acids glutamate and glycine are the primary excitatory and
inhibitory neurotransmitters in the CNS. Glutamate and glycine bind to sites
associated with the NMDA receptor and an excess of glutamatergic
stimulation can cause neurotoxic effects. Importantly, a high concentration of
NMDA receptors exists in the hippocampus. Glutamate, thus, may work in
conjunction with hypercortisolemia to mediate the deleterious neurocognitive
effects of severe recurrent depression. Emerging evidence suggests that drugs
that antagonize NMDA receptors have antidepressant effects.
SECOND MESSENGERS AND INTRACELLULAR CASCADES. The binding of a
neurotransmitter and a postsynaptic receptor triggers a cascade of membrane-
bound and intracellular processes mediated by second messenger systems.
Second messengers regulate the function of neuronal membrane ion channels.
Increasing evidence also indicates that mood-stabilizing drugs act on these
second messengers.
Immunologic Disturbance. Depressive disorders are associated with
several immunologic abnormalities, including decreased lymphocyte
proliferation in response to mitogens and other forms of impaired cellular
immunity. 
These 
lymphocytes 
produce 
neuromodulators, 
such 
as
corticotropin-releasing factor (CRF), and cytokines, peptides known as
interleukins. There appears to be an association with clinical severity,
hypercortisolism, and immune dysfunction, and the cytokine interleukin-1
may induce gene activity for glucocorticoid synthesis.
Findings from Brain Imaging
STRUCTURAL IMAGING. The most consistent abnormality observed in
depressive disorders is the increased frequency of abnormal hyperintensities
in subcortical regions, such as periventricular regions, the basal ganglia, and
the thalamus. More common among elderly adults, these hyperintensities
appear to reflect the deleterious neurodegenerative effects of recurrent
affective episodes. Ventricular enlargement, cortical atrophy, and sulcal
widening also have been reported in some studies. Some depressed patients
also may have reduced hippocampal or caudate nucleus volumes, or both,
suggesting more focal defects in relevant neurobehavioral systems. Diffuse
and focal areas of atrophy are associated with increased illness severity,
bipolarity, and increased cortisol levels.
Also, specific structures appear reduced in volume in patients with
depression, for example, the hippocampus. This reduction may be due to
neuronal loss due to the neurotoxic effects of the increased cortisol found in
depressed patients. Although many areas of the brain are susceptible to this
toxic effect, the hippocampus is particularly vulnerable, as it is rich in
glutaminergic neurons. Other areas with reported brain loss include the PFC,
cingulate gyrus, and cerebellum.
FUNCTIONAL IMAGINING. The most widely replicated positron emission
tomography (PET) finding in depression is decreased anterior brain
metabolism, which is generally more pronounced on the left side. From a
different vantage point, depression may cause a relative increase in
nondominant hemispheric activity. Furthermore, a reversal of hypofrontality
occurs after shifts from depression into hypomania, such that higher left
hemisphere reductions occur in depression compared with more significant
right hemisphere reductions in mania. Other studies have observed more
specific reductions of reduced cerebral blood flow or metabolism, or both, in
the dopaminergically innervated tracts of the mesocortical and mesolimbic
systems in depression. Evidence suggests that antidepressants at least
partially normalize these changes.
FIGURE 7-2
Key brain regions involved in affect and mood disorders. A: Orbital prefrontal
cortex and the ventromedial prefrontal cortex. B: Dorsolateral prefrontal cortex. C:
Hippocampus an˙˙d amygdala. D: Anterior cingulate cortex. (From Thase ME.
Mood disorders neurobiology. In: Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz P. (eds.). Kaplan
& Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry. 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA:
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2017.)
In addition to a global reduction of anterior cerebral metabolism, increased
glucose metabolism occurs in several limbic regions, particularly among
patients with relatively severe recurrent depression and a family history of
mood disorder. During episodes of depression, increased glucose metabolism
correlates with intrusive ruminations.
One meta-analysis found three consistent differences when comparing
fMRI studies of depressed patients with healthy controls. They found
activation of the pulvinar nucleus of the thalamus, more significant response
to negative stimuli in the amygdala, insula and anterior cingulate, and lesser
response in the dorsal striatum and dorsal lateral PFC.
Figure 7-2 illustrates some of the brain regions thought to be most critical
to mood regulation.
Our Understanding of the Genetics of Depressive Disorders
Numerous family, adoption, and twin studies have long documented the
heritability of mood disorders. Recently, however, the primary focus of
genetic studies has been to identify specific susceptibility genes using
molecular genetic methods.
Studies of Inheritance Patterns. Depression aggregates within families
and meta-analytic studies suggest that first-degree relatives of persons with
major depressive disorder have an increased odds ratio of 2.84 for developing
the disease. Only limited adoption studies have been done, of varying quality
and with mixed results, and most of what we know about the genetic
contribution to the disorder comes from twin studies, which estimate the
heritability to be 37 percent. It appears that this heritability is higher in
women. The twin studies also concluded that shared environmental factors
did not play a significant role in the familial aggregation of the disorder.
Genetic Studies. Genome-wide association studies have not found
significant associations. Although there are various explanations for the lack
of replicated findings, it likely relates to the fact that GWAS is powered to
detect common variants, and that the genes relevant to depression risk are
rare.
Candidate gene studies, which instead focus on specific genes of interest,
have resulted in many reported findings. However, few of these are
replicated. The most considerable focus has been on genes that might have a
role in the proposed mechanism of depression, such as the gene involved in
the 
encoding 
of 
serotonin 
(HTR1A), 
the 
serotonin 
transporter
(5HTTP/SLC6A4), or the dopamine receptor (DRD4), and transporter
(SLC6A3). Although some have replicated the most significant associations
for these genes (most often for the 5HTTP/SLC6A4 gene), the effect size are
small, and the sample sizes are smaller than those using GWAS, leading
some experts to question the role of statistical error in the positive and
negative findings. If some or all of the candidate gene studies are significant,
the most likely interpretation of available findings is that much, or most of
the genetic heritability for depression is the result of many genes each
contributing a small effect, which only becomes meaningful when combined
across thousands of genes. It is also possible, however, that there is some
rare, still undetected genetic variant.
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF DEPRESSION
A great deal of psychological and sociologic research has also shed light on
the pathology of depression. Perhaps the most meaningful contributions come
from research on the role of stress and depression.
Stress and Depression
Some clinicians believe that life events play the primary or principal role in
depression; others suggest that life events have only a limited role in the
onset and timing of depression. The most compelling data indicate that the
life event most often associated with the development of depression is losing
a parent before age 11 years. The environmental stressor most often
associated with the onset of an episode of depression is the loss of a spouse.
Another risk factor is unemployment; persons out of work are three times
more likely to report symptoms of an episode of major depression than those
who are employed.
Personality
No single personality trait or type uniquely predisposes a person to
depression; all humans, of whatever personality pattern, can and do become
depressed under appropriate circumstances. Persons with certain personality
disorders—OCPD, histrionic, and borderline—may be at higher risk for
depression than persons with an antisocial or paranoid personality disorder.
The latter can use projection and other externalizing defense mechanisms to
protect themselves from their inner rage.
ETIOLOGY
As we can see, there is a great deal of data accumulating on various
pathologies and dysregulations in the brain and body that are associated with
depression. Many experts in the field have attempted to combine various
lines of research into a coherent explanation of what causes us to suffer from
a depressive disorder. Although there is no single unifying theory, several
theories have emerged over the last century that attempt to account for the
various clinical, psychological, and biologic findings in depression.
Biologic Theories
The Monoamine Hypothesis. As already noted, the fact that all known
antidepressants acted on the monoamines (particularly catecholamines as
noted above) coupled with the fact that drugs and diseases that deplete
monoamines (e.g., reserpine and Parkinson disease) can cause depressive
symptoms led to the supposition that depression is the result of some
deficiency or dysregulation in brain monoamines.
Although the theory became, and to a point remains, prevalent, several
lines of evidence suggested it was an inadequate explanation for the etiology
of depression. Most notably, antidepressants take weeks to work, even though
their presumed action of increasing monoamine levels happens quickly, often
within hours after administration. Also, there is no convincing evidence of
any neurochemical imbalance, for example, in studies of the CSF of
depressed patients or postmortem brain tissue.
As noted in our discussion of the pathology of depression, there is good
evidence to suggest that neurotransmitters do play an important role, and that
receptor or second messenger relationships may explain some of the
inconsistent findings. Some have attempted to modify the monoamine
hypothesis, suggesting that it remains true, but is more complicated than
initially thought. However, a consistent and coherent explanation of the role
of neurotransmitters remains elusive, and we still do not know whether their
relationship to depression is one of causation or a later effect of the disease.
Brain Dysfunction. Theories of brain dysregulation attempt to incorporate
both findings of dysregulation with the increased and decreased responses to
various negative stimuli observed in studies. Areas of interest include:
The amygdala. Part of the limbic system, the amygdala appears to be a
crucial way station for processing novel stimuli of emotional significance and
coordinating or organizing cortical responses.
The hippocampus. Adjacent to the amygdala, the hippocampus is most
associated with learning and memory. Emotional or contextual learning
appears to involve a direct connection between the hippocampus and the
amygdala. Also, the hippocampus regulates the HPA axis by inhibiting
activity.
The Prefrontal Cortex (PFC). We think of the PFC as the structure that
holds representations of goals and appropriate responses to obtain these
goals. There are areas of specialization. For example, whereas left-sided
activation of regions of the PFC is more involved in goal-directed or
appetitive behaviors, regions of the right PFC are implicated in avoidance
behaviors and inhibition of appetitive pursuits. Subregions in the PFC appear
to localize representations of behaviors related to reward and punishment.
The anterior cingulate cortex (ACC). The ACC is involved in attention,
motivation, and environmental exploration and appears to help integrate
attentional and emotional inputs. The more rostral and ventral region has an
affective subdivision that connects extensively with limbic regions of the
brain. Activation of the ACC may facilitate control of emotional arousal,
particularly when thwarting goal when attainment encountering novel
problems.
There are various theories that attempt to integrate various pathologic
findings into an understanding of the etiology of depression. Although there
are many approaches and variations, many theories broadly fall into one of
two categories: neurogenesis hypotheses and neuroplastic hypotheses.
Neurogenesis Hypotheses. Neurogenesis hypotheses suppose that the
brain abnormalities leading to depression are the result of abnormalities in
development such that there is a deficit in the number of newborn neurons in
the brain.
There are several explanations for the cause of this deficit. Some versions
attempt to link the role of stress, particularly chronic stress, in causing
depression. Stress can cause increased activity in the HPA axis, which results
in increased glucocorticoid production. Glucocorticoids are known to
decrease neurogenesis. As neurogenesis continues in the adult hippocampus,
this may be an area preferentially affected by stress. The hippocampus is then
unable to adequately regulate the HPA axis, leading to continued elevated
glucocorticoid levels in the brain and further inhibition of neurogenesis.
Neuroplasticity Hypotheses. Neuroplasticity hypotheses propose that the
atrophy of already developed neurons causes depression. In this version,
rather than a deficit of nerve growth, atrophy occurs in already mature
neurons. As noted, chronic stress can increase glucocorticoid levels, which
can cause atrophy. It can also decrease the expression of BDNF, which is
essential for the survival, growth, and differentiation of neurons in the brain;
the result is atrophy. As this preferentially happens in the hippocampus, this
can account for the finding of decreased hippocampal volume in depressed
patients.
Psychosocial Theories
Life Events and Environmental Stress. A long-standing clinical
observation is that stressful life events more often precede first, rather than
subsequent, episodes of mood disorders. One theory proposed to explain this
observation is that the stress accompanying the first episode results in long-
lasting changes in the brain’s biology. As a result, a person has a high risk of
undergoing subsequent episodes of a mood disorder, even without an external
stressor.
Ms. C, a 23-year-old woman, became acutely depressed when she was
accepted to a prestigious graduate school. Ms. C had been working
diligently toward this acceptance for the past 4 years. She reported being
“briefly happy, for about 20 minutes” when she learned the good news
but rapidly slipped into a hopeless state in which she recurrently
pondered the pointlessness of her aspirations, cried constantly, and had to
physically stop herself from taking a lethal overdose of her roommate’s
insulin. In treatment, she focused on her older brother, who had regularly
insulted her throughout the course of her life, and how “he’s not doing
well.” She found herself very worried about him. She mentioned that she
was not used to being the “successful” one of the two of them. In
connection with her depression, it emerged that Ms. C’s brother had had a
severe, life-threatening, and disfiguring pediatric illness that had required
much family time and attention throughout their childhood. Ms. C had
become “used to” his insulting manner toward her. In fact, it seemed that
she required her brother’s abuse of her in order not to feel overwhelmed
by survivor guilt about being the “healthy, normal” child. “He might
insult me, but I look up to him. I adore him. Any attention he pays to me
is like a drug,” she said. Ms. C’s acceptance to graduate school had
challenged her defensive and essential compensatory image of herself as
being less successful, or damaged, in comparison with her brother,
thereby overwhelming her with guilt. Her depression remitted in
psychodynamic psychotherapy as she better understood her identification
with and fantasy submission to her brother. (Courtesy of J. C. Markowitz,
M.D. and B. L. Milrod, M.D.)
Psychodynamic Theories of Depression. The psychodynamic
understanding of depression defined by Sigmund Freud and expanded by
Karl Abraham is known as the classic view of depression. That theory
involves four key points: (1) disturbances in the infant–mother relationship
during the oral phase (the first 10 to 18 months of life) predispose to
subsequent vulnerability to depression; (2) depression can be linked to real or
imagined object loss; (3) introjection of the departed objects is a defense
mechanism invoked to deal with the distress connected with the object’s loss;
and (4) because the lost object is regarded with a mixture of love and hate,
feelings of anger are directed inward at the self.
Ms. E, a 21-year-old college student, presented with major depression
and panic disorder since early adolescence. She reported hating herself,
crying constantly, and feeling profoundly hopeless in part because of the
chronicity of her illness. Even at the time of presentation, she noted her
sensitivity to her mother’s moods. “My mother’s just always depressed,
and it makes me so miserable. I just don’t know what to do,” she said. “I
always want something from her, I don’t even know what, but I never get
it. She always says the wrong thing, talks about how disturbed I am, stuff
like that, makes me feel bad about myself.” In one session, Ms. E
poignantly described her childhood: “I spent a lot of time with my
mother, but she was always too tired, she never wanted to do anything or
play with me. I remember building a house with blankets over the coffee
table and peeking out, spying on her. She was always depressed and
negative, like a negative sink in the room, making it empty and sad. I
could never get her to do anything.” This patient experienced extreme
guilt in her psychotherapy when she began to talk about her mother’s
depression. “I feel so bad,” she sobbed. “It’s like I’m saying bad things
about her. And I love her so much, and I know she loves me. I feel it’s so
disloyal 
of 
me.” 
Her 
depression 
remitted 
in 
psychodynamic
psychotherapy as she became more aware of and better able to tolerate
her feelings of rage and disappointment with her mother. (Courtesy of J.
C. Markowitz M.D. and B. L. Milrod, M.D.)
Cognitive Theory. According to cognitive theory, depression results from
specific cognitive distortions present in persons susceptible to depression.
These distortions, referred to as depressogenic schemata, are cognitive
templates that perceive both internal and external data in ways that are altered
by early experiences. Aaron Beck postulated a cognitive triad of depression
that consists of (1) views about the self—a negative self-precept, (2) about
the environment—a tendency to experience the world as hostile and
demanding, and (3) about the future—the expectation of suffering and
failure. Therapy consists of modifying these distortions. We summarize the
elements of cognitive theory in Table 7-14.
Learned Helplessness. The learned helplessness theory of depression
connects depressive phenomena to the experience of uncontrollable events.
For example, when dogs in a laboratory are exposed to electrical shocks from
which they cannot escape, they showed behaviors that differentiate them
from dogs not exposed to such uncontrollable events. The dogs exposed to
the shocks would not cross a barrier to stop the flow of electric shock when
put in a new learning situation. They remained passive and did not move.
According to the learned helplessness theory, the shocked dogs learned that
outcomes were independent of responses, so they had both cognitive
motivational deficits (i.e., they would not attempt to escape the shock) and
emotional deficits (indicating decreased reactivity to the shock). In the
reformulated view of learned helplessness as applied to human depression,
internal causal explanations may produce a loss of self-esteem after adverse
external events. Behaviorists who subscribe to this theory often stress that
improvement of depression is contingent on the patient’s learning a sense of
control and mastery of the environment.
Table 7-14
Elements of Cognitive Theory
Element
Definition
Cognitive triad
Beliefs about oneself, the world, and the future
Schemas
Ways of organizing and interpreting experiences
Cognitive
distortions
Persistent ways of thinking that are inaccurate
and usually negatively biased
Arbitrary inference Drawing a specific conclusion without sufficient
evidence
Specific
abstraction
Focus on a single detail while ignoring other,
more important aspects of an experience
Overgeneralization Forming conclusions based on too little and too
narrow experience
Magnification and
minimization
Over- or undervaluing the significance of a
particular event
Personalization
Tendency to self-reference external events
without basis
Absolutist,
dichotomous
thinking
Tendency to place experience into all-or-none
categories
Courtesy of Robert M.A. Hirschfeld, M.D. and M. Tracie Shea, Ph.D.
Evolutionary Theory. Some theorists take an evolutionary perspective
toward depression. From this perspective, depression is an adaptive response
to perceived threats in the environment. From this perspective, depression is
an adaptive response to perceived threats in the environment, and the
tendency for depressed persons to withdraw from the environment in the face
of possible threats could be protective. Beyond threats of bodily harm, social
threats (e.g.,of exclusion or defeat) could also be considered threats in that
such social threats can reduce one’s perceived fitness, and hence, the
desirability of a mate. The depressive response in which one decreases
activity, withdraws from social situations, and approaches novel situations
with a negative bias (“that person will think I am a loser”) could be
interpreted as adaptive ways to reduce risk and avoid further social failures.
There are many varieties of evolutionary theory, some of which stress the
adaptive benefit of depression, others which see it as an outmoded response
which may have had a benefit in ancient societies, but is counterproductive in
our modern world. Other versions see the basic ability to vary mood as
adaptive but suggest depression is a dysregulation of that normal function.
These theories are difficult to test, as it is challenging to test the fitness of a
particular trait that is very common in a population.
Integrative Approaches
It remains difficult, if not impossible, to incorporate all the various
observations and research findings on depression into one grand unified
theory. However, the various attempts by investigators and theoreticians to
incorporate these findings have certain common features.
It seems clear that there exists some genetic vulnerability that puts persons
at risk for depression. Such persons who then encounter stress, either external
or internal, have epigenetic changes that differ from normal responses to
stress; for example, they may be less able to transcribe certain growth factors
in response to stress. This deficit results in subtle neuronal loss, and this loss
is particularly apparent in some vulnerable areas (e.g., the hippocampus). The
result is a disruption of the usual regulatory systems in the brain, causing
changes in the expressions of transmitters, hormones, and other regulatory
systems. This causes the physical changes that we associate with depression,
and our behavioral response to this is the subjective feeling of depression.
References
Akiskal. Mood disorders. In: Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, Ruiz P, eds. Kaplan &
Sadock’s Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry. 10th ed. Philadelphia,
PA: Wolters Kluwer; 2017.
Albert PR. Why is depression more prevalent in women? J Psychiatry
Neurosci. 2015;40(4):219–221.
Badcock PB, Davey CG, Whittle S, Allen NB, Friston KJ. The depressed
brain: an evolutionary systems theory. Trends Cogn Sci. 2017;21(3):182–
194.
